Source PDF : Regulation_N°02_18_CEMAC_CAMU_CM_on_the_regulation_of_foreign_exchange_in_the_CEMAC_b28ce35a.pdf
Chemin original : scraping\beac_data\P Des Changes\Règlements\Regulation_N°02_18_CEMAC_CAMU_CM_on_the_regulation_of_foreign_exchange_in_the_CEMAC_b28ce35a.pdf
Date extraction : 15/06/2026 21:32:22
======================================================================

--- Page 1 ---
EESIILihTION OT TOBEI§N
ilKgII^*N§E, IN THE ECONOIMC
MONf,TABY COMITUNTTÿ OF
^üND
cruü,r8IcA
ffi,ffi/&*
-'
BP" "!9't T Yasundé
tcTIul* 0entrale d'Ëludes des Transierts
nt rlu $uivide la R§glementatlnn des f hanger
ÀPRIL 2O2O

--- Page 2 ---
T-
SEqULihTION
B E,AC
BP. 1917 Yaoundé
:Jt*î'',*-'"i{ï$fiili:'ofillii'',*i"

--- Page 3 ---
ECONOMIC AND MONETARY REGULATION NO /18/CEMAC/CAMU/ClVI
COMMUNITY OF CENTRAL AFRICA
ON THE REGULATION OF
CENTRALAFRICAN FOREIGN EXCHANGE IN THE
MONETARY UNION CEMAC
MINISTERIAL COMMITTEE
THE MINISTERIAL COMMITTEE
Mindful of the revised treaty of 25 June 2008 of the Economic and Monetary
Community of Central Africa (CEMAC);
Mindful of the Convention of 25 June 2008 governing the Central African
Monetary Union (CAMU);
Mindful of the Monetary Cooperation Agreement of 23 November 1972 between
the Member States of the Bank of Central African States (BEAC) and the French
Republic;
Considering the Statutes of the BEAC in force;
Considering the Convention of l6 October 1990 establishing a Central African
Banking Commission and subsequent amending texts;
Mindful of the Convention of 17 January 1992 on the harmonisation of banking
regulations in the Central African States and subsequent amending texts,
Considering the BEAC Operating Account Agreement of 3 October 2014;
Mindful of the Treaÿ of 10 July 1992 establishing the Inter-African Conference
on Insurance Markets (CIMA);
Mindtul of Additional Act No. 03/01-CEMAC-CCE-03 of 8 December 2001
establishing the Central Africa Financial Market Surveillance Commission
(cosuMAF);
Pursuant to Regulation N'06/03-CEMAC-UMAC of 12 November 2003 on the
organisation, functioning and supervision of the Central African Financial
Market;
B EAC
BP. 1917 Yaoundé
7 uellule Centrale d'Eludes des Translerts
ot du Suivi de la Réglementation des Chang:s

--- Page 4 ---
Considering Regulation No. 05/01-UEAC-097-CM-06 of 3 August 2001 on the
CEMAC Customs Code;
Mindful of Regulation No. 0lllTICEMAC/UMACiCOBAC on the conditions for
the exercise and supervision of the activities of microfinance institutions in
CEMAC;
Mindful of Regulation No. 01/CEMAC^JMAC/CM of 11 April 2016 on the
of
prevention and suppression money laundering, terrorist financing and
proliferation in Central Africa;
Considering that exchange rate regulation contributes to the achievement of the
objectives of the common monetary policy of the Member States;
Considering the need for the CEMAC economies to preserve their external
balance;
Taking into account the liberalisation of the CEMAC economies and the
development of international trade;
After approval by the BEAC Board of Directors at its extraordinary session held
on 19 December 2018 in Yaoundé, Republic of Cameroon;
Meeting in ordinary session on 2l December 2018 in Yaoundé, Republic of
Cameroon;
On the proposal of the Governor of BEAC,
UNANIMOUSLY ADOPTS THE FOLLOWING REG TION:
B Ë.AC
BP. 1917 Yaoundé
vellule Centrale d'Etudes des Translerts
2
,il üu Suivide la Réglementation des Chanrte,

--- Page 5 ---
Table of contents
I.
PART GENERAL PROVISIONS
5
CHAPTER I - DEFINITIONS AND ACRONYMS
5
.
CHAPTER I I - SUBJECT SCOPE - GENERAL PRINCIPLES 1t
I
CHAPTER I I . ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION OF FOREIGN
EXCHANGE REGULATION t3
Section 1 : of the BEAC 13
SECTION 2:The Ministry in charge of currency and credit t4
Section 3 : COBAC l4
Section 4 : Approved Intermediaries 15
CHAPTER IV - REGULATIONS FOR EXTERNAL OPERATIONS 15
CHAPTER V : ASSIGNMENT AND RETROCESSION OF FOREIGN
CURRENCIES 16
TITLE II RESIDENTS' AND NON-RESIDENTS' ACCOLTNTS t7
CHAPTER I - FOREIGN CURRENCY FOR RESIDENTS ACCOT]NTS. ......... t7
CFIAPTER II - NON-RESIDENT ACCOUNTS t8
Section 1: Non-resident accounts in foreign curency 18
Section 2 : Non-resident accounts in CFA Franc 18
TITLE III - CURRENT TRANSACTIONS............. t9
CHAPTER I - EXPORT AND IMPORT OF GOODS.......... t9
Section 1 : Export of goods and repatriation of income t9
Section 2:lmport of goods and regulations 20
Section 3 : Transactions relating to gold and precious stones 20
CHAPTER II . EXPORT AND IMPORT OF SERVICES 2l
Section 1 : Export of services and repatriation of revenues.......... 2l
Section 2 ;Impoftation of services and regulations 2t
CHAPTER III : TRIPS 22
CHAPTER IV MANUAL CHANGE 23
CHAPTER V OTI{ER CURRENT TRANSACTIONS 25
B E.AG
BP. 1917 Yaoundé
3
r,ellule Centrale d'Etudes des Traitslerts
:r du Suivi de la Réglementation des Changes

--- Page 6 ---
TITLE IV: FINANCIAL AND CAPITAL TRANSACTIONS 26
CHAPTERI : FOREIGN SECURITIES 27
CHAPTER II : BORROWINGS-LOANS-REPAYMENTS 27
Section 1 : Loans and repayments 27
Section 2 : Loans and refunds 29
CHAPTER III: DIRECT AND PORTFOLIO INVESTMENT 30
I
Section : Direct inward investment 30
Section 2 : Outgoing direct investment 30
Section 3 - Inbound portfolio investment..... 31
Section 4 - Outgoing portfolio investment..... 5Z
PART V - HEDGING TRANSACTIONS AGAINST CURRENCY RISK....... 32
TITLE VI - COMMUNICATION OF INFORMATION AND REPORTS OF
OPERATIONS WITHTTIE OUTSIDE WORLD 33
TITLE VII : CONTROLS,INFRINGEMENTS AND PENALTIES 34
CHAPTER I : CONTROLS 34
CHAPTER II : INFRINGEMENTS AND PEN4LTIES.............. 35
I
Section : General information 35
Section 2 : Administrative Monetary Penalties 35
Section 3 : Non-monetary administrative Penalties 40
TITLE VIII - SPECIAL, TRANSITIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS......... 4t
CHAPTER I : SPECIAL PROVISIONS 41
Section 1: Escrow, guarantee and similar accounts 41
Section 2: Safeguard measures relating to the preservation of CEMAC's
external accounts 42
CHAPTER II: TRANSITIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS 43
B EAG
BP. 1917 Yaoundé
0ellule Centtale d'Eludes des Transferts
etdu Suivide la Réglementation des Changes
4

--- Page 7 ---
I
TITLE. GENERAL PROVISIONS
I-
CHAPTER DEFINITIONS AND ACRONYMS
Article 1- For the purposes of these Regulations, the terms and acronyms shall be
understood as
l) Administrative Authority: an entiÿ of the State involved in the
implementation of foreign exchange regulations.
2) Assent: an opinion whose terms are binding on the competent authority
which cannot override them.
3)
BEAC or Central Bank: Bank of Central African States.
4) Goods: physical assets or products on which property rights can be
established and whose economic ownership can be transferred from one
institutional unit to another through transactions.
5) Currency exchange office: legal entity approved by the Ministry in charge
of currency and credit for carrying out manual exchange activity.
6) CIF : (Cost Insurance Freight)
7) CEMAC : Central Africa Economic and Monetary Community.
8) Manual exchange: Traveller's notes or cheques, sold or purchased at a bank
or exchange office against local currencies.
9) CIMA : African Insurance Market Conference.
10) COBAC: Central African Banking Commission
11) Non-resident account: an account opened in the name of a non-resident
person or legal entity.
EI EAC
Bp. 1917 yaoundè
-elrJte Centrale d'Eludes des Tralsrerro
s ,lduSljividelaRéglelnenlalron
desChange,

--- Page 8 ---
l2) Resident account: an account opened in the name ofa resident person or a
legal entity.
13) Foreign currency account: account denominated in a currency other than
the CFA Franc issued by BEAC.
14) Escrow account: a custody account opened with an authorized institution
in the name of a beneficiary creditor and whose resources are
immobilized over an agreed period.
15) Guarantee account: account opened with a residential establishment to
guarantee a contractual commitment made by a debtor.
16) Legal tender: The quality of the currency in circulation in the
CEMAC that no one can refuse to receive for the settlement of transactions
denominated in CFA franc.
A to
17) Currency hedging: financial technique used protect against
fluctuations in the exchange rate of the currency in which an asset or
liability is denominated.
18) Leasing: a professional credit technique involving a contract of lease for
movable or immovable equipment, accompanied by a promise to sell to
the lessee, at an agreed price taking into account, at least in part, the
payments made in respect of the rents.
19) Import/export declaration: document issued by the customs administration
attesting to an import or export of goods or services.
20) Currency or foreign curency: curency other than the CFA Francs issued
by BEAC.
2l) Domiciliation: act by which an importer or exporter mandates an
approved intermediary to carry out on his behalf the terms of an import or
export operation from the initiation to clearance of the operation.
;* Li ;jr
C.
1,,: 1917 \,âouridt
..ri Lr i ientrnh C'[lu]es des Trarsrcrls
i i, :r i! i,rl: Rigielliilialir.n iicr lhanOe,
6

--- Page 9 ---
22) Credit institution: an organisation that carries out banking operations as a
regu1arprofessionwithinthemeaningofbankingregu1ationsinCEMAC
countries.
23) Sub-delegated institution: a legal entity other than a credit institution,
exchange office and semi-micro-finance institution, which benefits from a
delegation of a credit institution to carry out, under the responsibility of
the latter, foreign exchange transactions in the context of its nominal
activity, in particular hotels, travel agencies, airport shops and casinos.
24) Foreign or external: countries other than those of the CEMAC.
25) Euro: cuffency having legal tender and liberating porù/er within the
countries of the European System of Central Banks.
26) Export: the departure of goods or services to a foreign country or a free
zoîe located on the national territory of one of the CEMAC countries or
any other similar foreign area.
27) CFA Franc: franc of Financial Cooperation in Central Africa or XAF,
Currency having legal tender status and liberatory power in the CEMAC
countries.
28) FOB : Free On Board
29) GABAC : Action Group against Money-Laundering in Central Africa
30) Import: entry of goods or services into the CEMAC from abroad or from
a tranche zoîe located in one of the CEMAC countries or from any other
similar foreign area.
31) Approved intermediary: credit institution, post offrce administration and
for manual foreign exchange transactions, micro-finance institution and
approved exchange offices.
32) Portfolio investment: cross-border transactions and positions in debt
securities or equities, other than direct investment or reserve assets.
B T^AÇ
BP" 1917 Yaoundé
7
cellule Centrale d'Etudes des TransTerts
ot du Suivi de la Rôglamentation des Chanqes

--- Page 10 ---
33) Direct investment: participation greater than or equal to 10% held by a
resident in the capital of a non-resident company or by a non-resident in
the capital of a resident company giving him control or significant
influence over its management as well as real estate investment made
abroad by a resident or in CEMAC by a non-resident or investment in an
enterprise controlled or indirectly influenced by the investment company,
fellow enterprises, as well as debts.
34) Liberality: an act by which a person disposes free of charge, by inter
vivos donation or will, of all or part of his property or rights for the
benefit of another, whether or not belonging to his family.
35) AWB: Air waybill.
36) Foreign exchange market: intangible financial space where convertible
currencies are traded.
37) Non-resident: an individual or legal entity having his or her habitual
residence or centre of economic interest predominating outside the
CEMAC, including in particular:
-
Heads of diplomatic missions, diplomats and assimilated, as well as
members of their families;
- foreign patients, including long-term patients and the persons
accompanying them;
-
Tourists;
-
Students;
-
civil servants employed in extraterritorial enclaves;
- embassies, consulates, civil and military missions, international and
regional organizations;
-
soldiers on mission;
-
seasonal workers;
-
crew members of ships, aircraft and oil platforms,
-
companies or enterprises which carry out specific temporary tasks in
CEMAC countries unless they are registered in the Trade and Personal
Property Credit Registry of a CEMAC State, even on a provisional
basis.
,3 Ëê\Ç.:
8
.,',,,,,'cï,'l,',1{r[i'iilf;,i,,,,,,
,r t, ir,rri lt ll Rânlemertali"n ics Cfrnqe'

--- Page 11 ---
38)
Foreign exchange transaction: a spot or forward transaction, manual
or automated, the settlement of which involves or implies the conversion of
the CFA Franc into another currency and vice versa.
39) Electronic payment: payment made at least partially by electronic means
of payment, as defined in the E-Money Regulation.
40) Property to extinguish debts, attached to the official currency in
circulation in CEMAC Member States.
41) Arm's length principle: rule according to which the prices of transactions
between related entities are established by reference to the prices charged
by independent companies.
42) Proliferation: activity aimed at the manufacture, acquisition,
development, possession, transport, transfer or use of nuclear, biological,
chemical weapons or their means of delivery, in particular for terrorist
purposes.
in of
43) Financial market regulator: authority charge supervising the
financial market in Central Africa.
44) Resident: an individual or a legal entity having its habitual residence or
centre of economic interest predominating in CEMAC, even if they stay
discontinuously for more than one year in one of the CEMAC countries
or intend to pursue an economic activity there for at least one year,
of
including refugees, locally recruited employees extraterritorial
enclaves, staff of intemational organisations who do not have the status of
diplomat or equivalent diplomat and branches of multinationals.
45) Foreign resident: a resident individual who is a national of a country other
than CEMAC countries.
46) Input income: income that accrues to institutional units in return for thetr
contribution to the production or provision of frnancial assets and the
rental of natural resources to other institutional units.
B Ëê\C-r
ilP
9 1917 Yaou nd é
..rll,,rlri Cerllrale d'Etudes des Traitÿer1s
, cu .qurr Lte le ll4giementation des Chançi,

--- Page 12 ---
47) Currency risk: uncertainty about the value of one cuffency against another
in the short and medium term in relation to the future change in their
respective conversion rates.
48) Service: Intangible service provided by a resident for a non-resident and
vlce versa.
49) Current transactions: flow of goods, services, primary and secondary
lncomes
50) Transfer: a transaction executed at least in part electronically on behalf of
a payer, through a payment service provider, for the purpose of making
funds available to a payee.
5l) VAT : value added tax
:
52) UEMOA West African Economic and Monetary Union.
53) CAMIJ: Central African Monetary [Jnion
54)
Securities and other financial securities: securities and similar rights
registered in an account, issued by public or private legal entities, which
confer identical rights by category, fungible, freely transferable and
movable by purpose of the law, giving access, directly or indirectly, to a
share of the issuing entity's capital or a general right of claim on its assets,
which include shares representing shareholders' rights, bonds and other
debt securities representing creditors' rights as well as shares or shares in
undertakings for collective investment in securities.
55) CEMAC securities: securities issued in a CEMAC Member State by a
public or private legal entity resident and denominated in CFA Franc.
56) Foreign securities: securities issued in a CEMAC Member State by a legal
person governed by public or private law and denominated in a foreign
currency or issued in CFA Franc by a non-resident.
Ë§ ,Ë ê0.'Ç
irl,3. '19'17 Yaounde
-:rlllrir r"enitale d'Ettties des iransterts
10 :l ir ;iürvi rrt la Réglementation des 0hanges

--- Page 13 ---
57) Firm sale: contract by which the seller transfers ownership of a thing and
undertakes to deliver it to the buyer, who undertakes to pay him the price.
58) Emission Area: space gathering the CEMAC countries using the CFA
Franc issued by BEAC.
59) Franc zone: monetary cooperation area comprising France and Monaco,
the Comoros, the CEMAC Member States, comprising Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Congo, Gabon, Equatorial Guinea and Chad, as
well as the UEMOA Member States, including Benin, Burkina Faso, Côte
d'Ivoire, Guinea Bissau, Mali, Niger, Senegal and Togo, linked to each
other by monetary cooperation agreements.
CHAPTER II. SUBJECT MATTER - SCOPE . GENERAL
PRINCIPLES
Article 2. These Regulations define the organisation as well as the conditions and
procedures for carrying out foreign exchange operations in CEMAC Member
States.
Article 3. This Regulation shall apply to payments and settlements of current or
capital transactions to or from abroad as well as to manual foreign exchange
transactions of all resident and non-resident economic agents.
Article 4. All transactions covered by these Regulations must comply with the
regulations in force in CEMAC on the prevention and suppression of money
laundering, terrori st financing and pro feration.
I i
Article 5. Capital transactions are free, unless otherwise provided in these
Regulations.
Article 6. All transfers, payments and settlements of current transactions to
foreign countries may be made freely, subject to proof of the origin of the funds
and the presentation of the documents required by foreign exchange regulations.
However, within the limit of CFAF 1 million per month and per economic agent,
these operations shall be carried out freely on the basis of a simple indication of
the origin of the funds, subject to their declaration to the Central Bank.
B EAG
77
"*ri.,iiciTl ntlaleilr,lo?l,iilflfnsterts
.r ür SL,ru! !.: RÉplementation des Changes

--- Page 14 ---
Article 7. The currency issued and having legal tender and liberating power in
the CEMAC is the Franc of the Financial Community in Africa abbreviated to
CFA Franc.
The CFA Franc is linked to the Euro by a fixed parity, at the rate of I CFA Franc
equal to 0,001524Buro.
Article 8. The purchase and sale prices of currencies other than the euro are
established on the basis of the fixed exchange rate of the CFA Franc against the
euro and the exchange rates of these currencies against the euro on the exchange
markets.
Approved intermediaries display the exchange rates for buying and selling
currencies at their counters.
Article 9. An exchange fee, known as a manual exchange fee, determined by
free competition, is charged by authorised intermediaries on exchanges of foreign
It all to
banknotes. covers expenses relating manual foreign exchange
transactions as well as the intermediation margin.
However, the Central Bank may set a maximum rate depending on market
conditions.
Article 10. Imports of foreign culrency by the BEAC are free of all taxes and
customs duties.
Article 11. Subject to the prior authorisation of the Central Bank, authorised
intermediaries may import foreign currency under the conditions and procedures
specified by the latter's Instruction.
Imports of foreign cuffency made by authorised intermediaries are subject only to
a stamp duty of 0.01% of their face value.
Articte 12. Under penalty of administrative and criminal penalties provided for
by the regulations in force, the export of CFA Franc coins is prohibited, subject
to the possibility offered only to residents to hold in their possession, during their
travels, a sum of a maximum amount of CFAF 5000.
ffi ËAÇ;
.BP" 1917 Yaoundé
t.eruie 0entrale d'Etuies des Transterts
L2
;r $r: §iiivide la RÔglementatinn des Changes

--- Page 15 ---
CHAPTER TII - ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANTSATION OF FOREIGN
EXCHANGE REGULATION
SECTION l: OfBEAC
Article 13. In accordance with its Statutes, the BEAC conducts CEMAC's
exchange rate policy. In this respect, it draws up the rules relating to the
implementation of exchange rate policy and ensures, in collaboration with the
Ministry in charge of currency and credit that economic agents comply with the
exchange regulations applicable in the CEMAC.
Article 14. The BEAC issues an assent for the approval of exchange offices by
the Ministry of Currency and Credit.
Article 15. BEAC authorizes the import of foreign cunency by credit institutions
as well as the issuance, advertising and sale or transfer of foreign securities for
amounts exceeding CFAF 50 million.
Article 16. As part of its supervisory role, the BEAC monitors the compliance of
external transactions and operations with foreign exchange regulations. To this
end, it carries out, with the assistance of COBAC and the Ministry in charge of
to
currency and credit, on-the-spot and documentary checks ensure that
authorised intermediaries and other economic agents comply with all provisions
relating to exchange regulations.
Article 17. As part of its controls, the BEAC may ask economic agents to
communicate information relating to their extemal transactions, accompanied by
the necessary supporting documents.
Article 18. The BEAC identifies exchange rate violations and imposes
administrative sanctions on offending economic agents. To this end, it may
request the assistance of the Ministry in charge of currency and credit and
COBAC under the conditions and procedures provided for in these regulations.
The BEAC informs the Ministry in charge of currency and credit and, where
applicable, the COBAC, of the failure of economic agents to comply with foreign
exchange regulations.
,::: ;
,,.:.,
.," .i '_
"i 9. !zt;.-.,.t,,
.,.1.:,1,11,,, r'fir !;; , 11,,.
13 I . i:t.t!:tir1)tiiir;ii ';' - ,r,., i;1.2rr,.,,

--- Page 16 ---
SECTION 2: The Ministries in charge of currency and credit;
Article 19. The Ministry in charge of currency and credit issues and withdraws
the approval of exchange offices. As such, it exercises administrative control over
them.
Article 20. The competent administrations of the Ministry in charge of currency
and credit shall contribute to the monitoring of the implementation of the
exchange regulations in force in CEMAC. They are in particular responsible for:
-
the formalization of imports and exports of goods and services;
-
the verification of the effectiveness of the inputs and outputs of goods and
services on which exports and imports are based,
-
The control of economic agents at border posts.
Article 21. The competent administrations of the Ministry of Currency and
Credit provide the Central Bank with information on imports and exports of
goods and services.
Article 22.The Ministry in charge of currency and credit shall record and punish
breaches by economic agents of exchange regulations under the conditions
provided for in these Regulations and shall inform the BEAC thereof.
SECTION 3: Of COBAC
Article 23. COBAC supports BEAC in monitoring the implementation of foreign
exchange regulations. In this respect, under the terms and conditions provided for
in these Regulations and in its implementing regulations, COBAC is responsible
in particular for.
monitor authorised intermediaries to ensure that they comply with their
obligations under the implementation of exchange regulations,
Record and sanction breaches of exchange regulations by authorised
intermediaries under the conditions provided for in these Regulations and
inform the BEAC thereof.
Article 24. COBAC communicates the results of its controls to the Ministry in
charge of currency and credit and to BEAC and, where applicable, informs them
of the sanctions imposed on approved non-compliant intermediaries.
B EAG
t4 BP" 1917 Yaoundé
. ttluie Centrale d'Etudes desTranslerts
tr lri:v'd; la RÉllementalron des Chang+:

--- Page 17 ---
SECTION 4: Approved intermediaries
Article 25. Approved intermediaries ensure that external transactions comply
with foreign exchange regulations before they are executed. They also ensure that
sub-delegated institutions comply with their obligations under foreign exchange
regulations.
Article 26. Approved intermediaries collect information on external transactions
and report periodically to the Central Bank in accordance with the exchange
regulations. As such, they may request information from customers.
Article 27. Where the authorised intermediary domiciliating an operation has
doubts as to its regularity, he shall inform the competent authority in accordance
with the regulations in force in CEMAC on the prevention and repression of
money laundering and the financing of terrorism and proliferation.
Article 28. Credit institutions shall periodically communicate to the Central Bank
statements of their corespondent accounts and global foreign exchange positions
as well as any other relevant document making it possible to verifu cuffency
inflows and outflows.
CHAPTER IV. REGULATIONS FOR EXTERNAL
OPERATIONS
Article 29. Payments for external transactions a.re made through correspondent
banks in one of the currencies of both partners or in any other currency accepted
by both parties to the transaction.
Article 30. External transactions are settled exclusively through credit
institutions. For this purpose, transactions between two resident entities cannot be
settled through bank accounts domiciled abroad.
Article 31. Transfers of funds to foreign countries may be subject to a transfer
fee, determined by free competition.
if
However, a Central Bank Instruction may set the maximum transfer fee rate
market conditions so require.
æË.AC
BP. 1917 Yaoundé
1s i:eltule Centrale d'Etudes des Translerts
desChanges
etoï§uividelaRÔglementation

--- Page 18 ---
The transfer fee is charged exclusively to the benefit of the approved
intermediary when he uses the channel of his external correspondents for the
settlement of the expiry date. On the other hand, when the transfer is carried out
through the Central Bank, the share of the commission due to the Central Bank is
determined by the latter's Instruction.
Article 32. Settlements of extemal transactions are reported to the Central Bank
and the relevant administrative authorities.
An Instruction of the Central Bank specifies the terms and conditions for
reporting extemal transactions.
Article 33. External transactions with electronic payment instruments are treated
as transfers and manual exchange.
Article 34. The use of electronic payment instruments outside CEMAC is
restricted to current transactions within the limits of the thresholds provided for
in these Regulations.
Article 35. Transfer orders related to transfers are issued within 2 working days
of the client's submission of the request at the credit institution's counters,
provided that all the conditions are met by the latter and the client.
CHAPTER V: ASSIGNMENT AND RETROCESSTON OF FOREIGN
CURRENCIES
Articte 36. foreign currencies held in a CEMAC Member State, regardless of
their ownership, shall be transferred or, where applicable, deposited by the owner
with a credit institution.
Article 37. Residents shall transfer to their domiciliary credit institution all
income or proceeds received in foreign curency abroad or paid by a non-resident
in respect of their extemal transactions.
Article 38. The currencies collected by credit institutions are retroceded to the
Central Bank.
B ËI\C
BË 1917 Yaoundo
.,rr,,,pl.errtrale d'Etudes des Jrarstetts
16
,,. .i,r: ,tj,r Récenentaf'1n cP§ C:2nge(

--- Page 19 ---
However, in order to cover the current foreign exchange needs of their customers,
credit institutions may be authorised to keep a proportion of the currencies
received.
An Instruction of the Central Bank specifies the conditions and modalities of
foreign exchange retrocession by credit institutions.
Article 39. The currencies referred to in Article 37 of these Regulations include
export eamings from goods and services, borrowings, current account advances,
income, donations, direct or portfolio investments and transfers without
counterpart.
Article 40. Unjustified foreign currency assets held by credit institutions in the
accounts of correspondents shall be transferred to the Central Bank under the
terms and conditions specifred by the latter's Instruction.
TITLE II RESIDENTS' AND NON-RESIDENTS' ACCOUNTS
CHAPTER I - RESIDENTS ACCOUNTS IN FOREIGN
CURRENCY.
Article 41. The opening of an account in foreign currency outside the CEMAC is
prohibited to resident legal entities, with the exception of credit institutions.
However, the Central Bank may authorise a resident legal entity to open a foreign
curency account outside the CEMAC under the conditions and procedures laid
down by the latter's Instruction. The Central Bank shall inform the Ministry in
charge of currency and credit accordingly.
Article 42. The accounts of individuals' resident abroad are reported to the
Central Bank.
Article 43. The opening of a foreign curency account in CEMAC for the benefit
of a resident is not permitted.
However, the Central Bank may authorise a resident corporation to open a
foreign currency account in the CEMAC under the conditions and procedures laid
down by the latter's Instruction.
B EAG
BP. 1917 Yaoundé
Lclrul,, Ccnlrate rJ'Etuies des Iranslerls
; s1 §lirr de la Règ.eÊt',:l' :n rcs Charc''

--- Page 20 ---
Article 44. The foreign currency account opened in CEMAC may not be
credited with payments in CFA Franc or by debiting an account in CFA Franc.
In addition, it may not have a debit balance.
Article 45. Withdrawals of foreign Çunency from a resident's foreign curency
account to cover local needs are prohibited.
CHAPTER II - NON-RESIDENT ACCOUNTS
SECTION 1: Non-resident accounts in foreign currency.
Article 46. The opening of non-resident accounts in foreign currency in the
books of credit institutions is free in the CEMAC, subject to ex post information
from the Central Bank.
The applicant shall send the credit institution a reasoned request to open a non-
resident's account in foreign culrency.
Article 47. Transactions to debit and credit non-resident accounts in foreign
currency are free, subject to compliance with the regulations in force.
Article 48. Non-resident accounts in foreign curency may not be credited with
payments in CFA Franc or by debiting an account in CFA Franc.
Non-residents' accounts in foreign currency may not be in debit.
Article 49. Withdrawals of foreign curency from the accounts of non-residents
in foreign currency to cover local needs are prohibited.
Article 50. The loss of non-resident status automatically results in the closure of
the non-resident's account and the credit balance is transferred to a resident's
account in CFA Franc.
SECTION 2: Non-resident accounts in Franc CFA.
Article 51. The opening ofnon-resident accounts in CFA francs in the books of
credit institutions is free in CEMAC, subject to the presentation of the documents
required by exchange regulations.
B E,A'G
BP 1917 Yaoundé
18 tellt:k Cerrtrâle d'Etlies des Ttaltsletts
It ou Survi oera Réglemen:l: )I] iel r'han0Ê'

--- Page 21 ---
Article 52. Credits and debits to non-resident accounts in CFA Franc are free,
subject to compliance with the regulations in force.
TITLE III CURRENT TRANSACTIONS.
-
I.
CHAPTER EXPORT AND IMPORT OF GOODS
SECTION 1: Export of goods and repatriation of revenues.
Article 53. All transactions related to exports of goods are reported to the
competent administrative authorities. Transactions related to exports of goods
worth CFAF 5 million or more are domiciled with a CEMAC credit institution.
Leasing operations involving the export of equipment or material shall be treated
as deferred payment exports and shall be subject to the obligation of a bank direct
debit provided for in this Article.
Article 54. Any export of goods gives rise to the submission of an export
declaration to the customs administration or entity in lieu thereof and a firm
exchange commitment obliging the exporter to repatriate and transfer the related
revenues within the applicable regulatory time limits.
Article 55. The exporter has a maximum period of 150 days from the effective
date of export to collect and repatriate the export proceeds from firm sales.
Article 56.The export earnings from the services are collected and repatriated by
the exporter through his domiciliary bank through the Central Bank.
Article 57. At the exporter's request, the receiving bank may settle commercial
and financial discounts or returns of goods on exports, on presentation of
supporting documents:
Article 58.The credit institution may pay export commissions provided for in a
representation, brokerage, service or factoring contract.
Article 59.Any reduction in the amount of the export product to be repatriated
following a withholding tax on bills of intermediation or any other costs related
to the basic transaction is justified by economic agents at the time of repatriation
of their revenues. To this end, economic agents shall provide the authorised
B EAG
1e
,,ri,rF#itl'fliË'l*iioiiflàé,*i"t'
(]hanqe'
er dï§uivirie la Rérrletientalinn des

--- Page 22 ---
intermediaries with the relevant supporting documents for the purpose of post-
clearance checks by the competent authorities.
Article 60. The conditions and procedures for the domiciliation and payment of
the export of goods and for the clearance of the relevant file shall be specified by
instructions from the Central Bank.
SECTION 2: Importation of goods and regulation
Article 61. Imports of goods into CEMAC are free, with the exception of gold
and other goods subject to specific regulations. In addition, States may impose
restrictions on the import of certain goods on humanitarian, health, safety,
security, security or environmental grounds.
Article 62. all imports of goods are subject to an import declaration to the
customs administration or to the customs administration in its place.
For goods subject to import restrictions, authorisation from the competent
technical authorities is required in addition to the above-mentioned import
declaration.
Article 63. Article Imports of goods for an amount equal to or greater than
5 million CFA francs are domiciled with a credit institution in the country of final
destination.
Article 64. Import operations exempt from the direct debit requirement are
specified by instructions from the Central Bank.
SECTION 3: Transactions relating to gold and precious stones
Article 65.Residents are free to hold, buy and sell gold and precious stones rn
any form within CEMAC, subject to compliance with applicable regulations.
Article 66. The import and export of gold and precious stones are subject to prior
authorization by the competent technical authorities.
Are exempt from prior authorization:
-
gold imports and exports carried out by the Treasury on its behalf, as weli
as those carried out by the Central Bank; É' Ë: l\ Li
i, rerT y,1(,,licjr
]
20 ,, d'LL['i': ii':q ;:Slen:
:,r fit,alt
., -, llt l,'r .l' - 'r1\rr2J\c:(
j'\

--- Page 23 ---
Imports and exports of manufactured articles containing a small quantity of
gold or precious stones, including iined or plated articles.
CHAPTER II EXPORT AND IMPORT OF SERVICES
-
SECTION L: Export of services and repatriation of revenues.
Article 67 . All extemal transactions related to services are reported to the
relevant authorities.
Article 68.Transactions with third parties related to services for an amount equal
to or greater than CFAF 5 million are domiciled with a CEMAC credit
institution.
Article 69. All exports of services are evidenced by a contract for the provrsron
of services or any document in its place.
The service contract may consist of one of the following documents: agreement,
purchase order or contract form, invoice or any other document in lieu thereof.
The service contract must include the following information:
-
the names ofthe contracting parties and their addresses;
-
the purpose, nature and scope ofthe services to be provided;
-
the agreed remuneration and its terms of payment;
-
The date of conclusion ofthe contract and its duration.
Article 70,The export eamings from the services are collected and repatriated by
the exporter through his domiciliary bank through the Central Bank.
SECTION 2: Importation of services and regulation
Article 71. All imports of services are evidenced by a contract under which a
non-resident undertakes to provide a resident with a service or technical
assistance, or in particular to grant him the right to use a sign, trademark or trade
name.
Article 72. All service import expenses are reported to the Central Bank.
*, Ë r''" C*
27
"tT'';fl0:t'L.1li;l.'o'i''u"'
.' . .:'^'Èii,.tttq'','r?noi

--- Page 24 ---
Transactions for an amount equal to or greater than CFAF 5 million
are
domiciled with a CEMAC credit institution.
Article 73. Any technical assistance or import of intra-group seryices, as well as
any financial contribution by resident companies to the management and research
and development costs incurred by their parent companies or shareholders, is
subject to compliance with the arm's length principle.
Article 74. Imports of services shall be carried out under the responsibility of the
entity concerned and shall consist of the actual provision of services
corresponding to the real needs of the resident entities and remunerated at their
fair price, failing which the relevant transfer payments shall be rejected.
Credit institutions shall carry out specific checks for these operations in
accordance with the terms and conditions specified in the Central Bank
Instruction.
Article 75. The BEAC defines by Instruction the terms and conditions and the
constituent elements of the pre-financing and hedging files for the import of
servlces.
CHAPTER III: TRIPS
Article 76. The allocation of foreign exchange to travellers is subject to the
production of the documents referred to in Article 80 of these Regulations.
Article 77. Foreign exchange is allocated in cash, by funds transfer, credit card or
prepaid card. It is capped, all means of payment combined, at the equivalent of
CFAF 5 million per person and per trip
For foreign exchange needs exceeding the ceiling indicated in paragraph 1 of this
article, duly justified requests shall be met by authorised intermediaries.
Article 78. Individuals crossing the borders of CEMAC, on entry or exit, are
authorised to hold through them, without declaration, cash sums not exceeding
the equivalent of 5 million CFA francs, foreign exchange and CFA francs
combined. Any amount exceeding CFAF 5 million or the equivalent in foreign
currency as well as negotiable instruments and securities corresponding to this
threshold are subj ect to a declaration to the customs services, under penalty of
sanctions provided for by the regulations in force.
ÊËl\Ü
sP. 1917 Yaounde
22
,,ettute 0enitele d'Etudes des Ïrairslerli
., j,.'i'.;,j. 6111Pên'trPnta! ôn '1ec îtan0P

--- Page 25 ---
The obligation to report is not fulfilled if the information provided by the
individual is incorrect or incomplete.
During checks at border posts, the customs services identiÿ the traveller and
may, if necessary, request additional information on the origin of the funds
transported. In the absence of proof of the origin of the funds, the customs
services confiscate the sums in question and remit them to the Central Bank.
Resident travellers entering CEMAC must retum the currency they hold to an
approved intermediary.
Article 79. Upon leaving CEMAC, non-resident travellers may carry foreign
currency or any other foreign means of payment for an amount equal to the
maximum amount they declared upon entering CEMAC.
When non-resident travellers have not made any declaration on entry or if they
justiÿ
carry sums exceeding their own contributions, they must their origin for
amounts exceeding CFAF 5 million. In the absence of proof of the origin of the
funds, the customs services confiscate the sums in question and remit them to the
Central Bank.
Article 80. In support of their requests, travellers must submit the following
documents, depending on the purpose ofthe trip
for tourists, a valid travel document and a transport ticket;
for business travel, a professional card or certificate, a valid travel
document and a travel ticket;
for students and trainees, a student card or a certificate of registration or a
certificate of tuition or a certificate of scholarship, a valid travel document
and a travel ticket;
for official missions, a mission order, a valid travel document and a
transport ticket;
for other travellers, a valid travel document and a transport ticket.
CHAPTERIV - MANUAL EXCHANGE.
Article 81. Credit and micro-finance institutions, post offices and exchange
offices are authorised to carry out manual foreign exchange operations in
accordance with the provisions of these Regulations.
B ËAC]
23
,,,,,,Icïtl,B1[rloi,ooll,1l,,,u,',
:l dL' Suivi de 1a Réglementalirn des 0hanop,

--- Page 26 ---
However, in the context of transactions to purchase foreign currency from
customers, credit institutions may grant sub-delegations to certain entities, in
particular hotels, travel agencies, airport shops and casinos, which, because of
their activities, receive payments in foreign curency from foreign travellers.
Credit institutions shall notif, the Central Bank ofthe sub-delegations granted to
eligible entities.
Article 82. Currency exchange offices are approved by the Ministry in charge of
curency and credit for the exercise of manual exchange activity, after approval
by the BEAC.
The application for approval shall be submitted to the Ministry of Currency and
Credit, accompanied by a file, the constituent documents of which shall be laid
down by Central Bank Instruction.
Exchange offices shall effectively start their manual exchange activity within one
year of the date of notification by the Ministry in charge of currency and credit of
their approval, failing which it shall lapse.
BEAC maintains and updates the list of approved exchange offices.
Article 83. The sub-deiegated institutions of the credit institutions carry out, on a
subsidiary basis, the purchase of foreign currency for cash. They may not, under
any circumstances, sell foreign currency.
Sub-delegated institutions sell to the delegated credit institutions every l5 days
the currencies collected in the course of their business.
Credit institutions shall ensure that their subdelegates comply with the manual
exchange provisions of these Regulations and subsequent texts and shall report
annually to the Central Bank and COBAC.
Article 84. Entities authorised to carry out manual foreign exchange operations
shall be required to.
serve their customers within the limits of their foreign curency availability
and the currency allocation thresholds set by these Regulations;
check the conformity of the supporting documents presented by customers;
report to the Ministry in charge of currency and credit, the Central Bank
and COBAC, in accordance with the procedures provided for in these
Regulations and in subsequent texts.
t:.
l
,t;;'".)
,
24 i.,irrii'jl:':rir'::'l'' '
I
I.i L ir ., ,r i,i
r r,,l ' li,1çi;;: ,
.;r " "

--- Page 27 ---
Article 85. The BEAC defines by Instruction the conditions and modalities for
carrying out manual foreign exchange activity.
CHAPTER Y- OTHER CURRENT TRANSACTIONS
Article 86. Other current extemal transactions are reported by credit institutions
to the Central Bank and to the Ministry of Money and Credit.
Article 87. The exercise of the activity of transferring funds through foreign cash
transport companies is subj ect to compliance with a set of specifications issued
by the Central Bank.
Article 88. Transfers abroad of more than CFAF 100 million are declared to the
Central Bank and the Ministry in charge of currency and credit at least 30 days
before their completion.
Article 89. For the purposes of this Regulation, factor income includes:
-
direct and portfolio investment income;
-
labour compensation;
-
work remuneration
;
-
Other income, including rents, product and production taxes and subsidies.
Article 90. Transfers of capital income of non-residents outside CEMAC, in
particular in the form of profits, dividends, interest and royalties, shall be free,
subject to the provision of supporting documents required by exchange
regulations, where the basic transaction is not subject to authorisation or, where
applicable, has been authorised by the competent authority.
Article 91. Transfers, outside the CEMAC, of part of the working income of
non-residents or foreign residents, in particular salaries, fees, per diem,
miscellaneous allowances and social benefits, are free on presentation of the
supporting documents required by exchange regulations.
Articte 92. Transfers, outside CEMAC, of other non-resident income, in
particular rents and taxes on products and production, are free upon presentation
of supporting documents.
Article 93. Transfers, outside CEMAC, of non-resident income from public and
private contracts are free on presentation of supporting documents.
Ë ËAÇ
'ÈF. 1917 Yaoundü
25 ,.. ,lttü lÉ (:entr?le d'Efuies des Ttarsletis
:v rlj', Ré0lerren1)trrn 'iPc ''rlnE

--- Page 28 ---
Article 94. Without prejudice to the application of Article 6 of these Regulations,
requests for transfers for amounts exceeding one million CFA francs shall be
made on presentation of the supporting documents required by exchange
regulations.
Article 95. Other transfer operations outside CEMAC are free, subject to the
presentation of supporting documents. These include the following operations:
-
the payment of taxes due to a foreign administration;
-
the payment of penalties and fines imposed by a foreign administration;
-
contributions, social benefits, annuities, pensions, insurance premiums or
allowances;
-
the payment of damages due following a judicial, arbitrating or amicable
settlement decision;
-
family workers due to illness, study or subsistence;
- donations and gifts to charitable organisations, medical research
organisations or associations defending social or humanitarian causes, up
to a maximum of CFAF 10 million per year and per principal;
-
donations and inheritances;
-
income from the sale of assets;
-
Sums from various legal sources.
Article 96. Transfer requests are executed by credit institutions upon presentation
of the supporting documents required by foreign exchange regulations.
TITLE IV: FINANCIAL AND CAPITAL TRANSACTIONS
Article 97. Financial and capital transactions between CEMAC and the outside
world are free, subject to compliance with the provisions of these Regulations
and subsequent texts.
When carrying out financial and capital transactions, credit institutions are
responsible for veriÿing the origin of funds, their nature and destination and for
collecting information for the Ministry of Currency and Credit and for the BEAC.
Article 98. The transfer of foreign securities and all other capital transactions
between CEMAC residents are not subj ect to authorisation.
(-'
€5 t-- É\
',à 1917 Yaou ndé
, - '.,ni':l: 1'Èitiies des Ïraislerls
26 . r ir i-.!iir.ilii'it ieqihanqPt

--- Page 29 ---
CHAPTER I: FOREIGN SECURITIES
Article 99. The funds collected in CEMAC on the occasion of an issue of
securities in foreign currency or CFA Franc by a non-resident are intended to
finance investments in the sub-region as a matter of priority.
Article 100. For amounts of less than CFAF 50 million, the issue, advertisement,
sale or transfer of foreign securities shall be declared to the Central Bank and the
Central African Financial Market Regulator prior to the operation.
Article 101. beyond CFAF 50 million, the issuance, advertising and sale or
transfer of foreign securities in CEMAC, under foreign exchange regulations, are
subject to prior authorization by BEAC, which informs the Ministry in charge of
currency and credit, without prejudice to the assent of the Central African
Financial Market Regulator.
Article 102. The transfer abroad of the proceeds of an issue of foreign securities
issued in CEMAC is subject to the authorisation of the Central Bank, which
informs the Ministry in charge of currency and credit.
CHAPTER II: BORROWINGS-LOANS-REPAYMENTS
SECTION 1: Loan and Repayments
Articte 103. CEMAC residents are free to borrow from non-resident entities.
Article 104. Issues of securities outside CEMAC by resident entities are
considered as loans.
Article 105. All loans contracted with non-residents, either by an individual or a
legal entity whose habitual residence or registered office is in CEMAC, or by
branches or subsidiaries in CEMAC of corporate bodies whose registered office
is abroad, must, 30 days before their implementation, be declared by the borrower
or his representative to the Ministry in charge of currency and credit and the
Central Bank.
The loan declaration is accompanied by a file containing in particular:
-
The contract relating to the loan;
Ë
- loan; §J'
the repayment schedule of the '4^ 'C::
27 3P 1S17 YaoLnCtl
j'lfii:liî:jflil'd,liilï;fili,,

--- Page 30 ---
-
the company accounts of the applicant party;
-
the act authorizing the person in charge to bind the entity in connection
with the loan, if applicable.
Article 106. Thirty days after the completion of the operation, the borrower or his
representative shall send to the Ministry in charge of currency and credit and to
the Central Bank the documents certiùing the effectiveness of the borrowing
operation, in particular the documents proving the repatriation of the loan or the
acquisitions made.
Article 107. Credit institutions are free to execute, on behalf of customers,
international transfers in respect of the repayment due dates of their borrowings,
subject to the provision of the following supporting documents:
-
Proof of prior declaration of the loan to the Ministry in charge of currency
and credit and to the BEAC;
-
the repayment schedule or amortization schedule for the loan;
-
the document establishing the repatriation of the loan or the effectiveness
of the acquisitions made;
-
the loan or borrowing contract
Article 108. Loans contracted abroad by the states as well as loans guaranteed by
them are reported to the Central Bank by the Ministry in charge of currency and
credit.
The statement must include, at a minimum, information on the amount of the
loan, the currency and the repayment schedule.
Article 109. The Central Bank's performance of international transfers as part of
the settlement of the repayment due dates of loans contracted abroad by States is
subject to the provision by the States of documents proving the repayment of the
loan or the acquisitions made.
Article 110. Credit institutions are free to borrow from non-residents, subject to
reporting to the Ministry of currency and Credit and BEAC, no later than 30 days
after their completion.
Article 111. Repayments of loans referred to in Article 105 of these Regulations
shall be declared by the credit institutions to the Ministry responsible for
cuffency and credit and to the Central Bank within 30 days of their completion.
B EAG
BP" 1917 Yaoundé
28 cettutiientratt d'Etudes des Transleris
rri'u iuüioe ta Rüglemtntation des changes

--- Page 31 ---
SECTION 2: Loans and refunds
Article ll2. Loans granted to non-residents by resident legal entities are subject
to prior authorisation by BEAC.
The application for authorisation shall be accompanied by u file containing in
particular:
-
the loan agreement;
-
the certified financial statements of the lending company over the last three
financial years;
-
the loan repayment schedule;;
-
the act authorizingthe person in charge to bind the entity,if necessary
;
-
the certified financial statements of the borrowing company over the last
three financial years;
-
the commitment to repatriate the income from the loan and principal at the
end of the operation;
-
the status of external transactions over the last three financial years.
Article 113. Credit institutions are free to execute international transfers in
respect of loans granted to non-residents, subject to the provision of the following
supporting documents:
-
the authorization of the Central Bank;
-
the loan agreement;
-
the loan repayment schedule;
-
the commitment to repatriate the income from the loan and principal at the
end of the operation;
Article ll4. Loans granted to non-residents by credit institutions and related
repayments are reported to the Ministry of currency and Credit and the Central
Bank within 30 days of their completion.
Article 115. CEMAC residents shall declare to the Ministry in charge of currency
and credit and the Central Bank, no later than 30 days later, the repayments
received in respect of loans previously granted to non-residents.
Repayments received on loans must be repatriated and retroceded to the Central
Bank.
Non-receipt of loan maturities is reported to the Ministry of currency and Credit
and the Central Bank. B Ë,ê'G
BP" i 9'17 Yaoundé
29
tellui0 Certtrale d'Etudss des Transierts
,r iu liriu rls la Rirhmenlation des Changes

--- Page 32 ---
CHAPTER III: DIRECT AND PORTFOLIO INVESTMENT
Article 116. Foreign direct and portfolio investment is free.
Article 117. Credit institutions shall execute on behalf of their customers
transactions involving direct and portfolio investments under the terms and
conditions laid down by Central Bank Instruction.
SECTION 1: Direct inward investment
Article 118. Foreign direct investments in CEMAC are declared by the investor
or his agent to the Central Bank and the Ministry in charge of currency and credit
at least 30 days before their completion.
Article 119. The terms and conditions for the execution of direct investment and
portfolio operations and the clearance of related files are specified by Central
Bank Instruction.
Article 120. Foreign direct investments in CEMAC that constitute a capital
increase resulting from the reinvestment of undistributed profits are reported to
the Central Bank and the Ministry in charge of currency and credit within 30 days
of the completion of the operation.
Article 121. The transfer of the proceeds of the liquidation or transfer of foreign
direct investment in CEMAC shall be declared to the Central Bank and the
Ministry in charge of currency and credit at least 30 days before its completion.
Article 122. The realization and liquidation of foreign direct investments in
CEMAC shall be declared to the Central Bank and the Ministry in charge of
curency and credit within 30 days of the operation.
SECTION 2: Outgoing direct investment
Article 123. Direct investments by residents abroad are subject to the prior
authorisation of the Central Bank, which informs the Ministry in charge of
curency and credit.
Àrticle 124. The terms and conditions for the execution of direct investment and
portfolio operations and the clearance of related files are specified by Central
Bank Instruction.
B EI\G
30
""'''u#*Ll'llrtloi'"oii'1f"''*
,t ou $urvi da la Règlementation des Changet

--- Page 33 ---
Article 125. Direct investments by residents abroad, which constitute an increase
in capital resulting from reinvestments of undistributed profits, shall be declared
to the competent authorities within 30 days of the completion of the operation.
Article 126. The liquidation of direct investments by residents abroad shall be
declared to the Central Bank, which shall inform the Ministry in charge of
culrency and credit within 30 days of its completion.
Article 127. The reinvestment of the proceeds of the liquidation of direct
investment by residents abroad shall be reported to the Central Bank and the
Ministry of currency and Credit within 30 days of its completion.
Article 128. The liquidation proceeds that have not been reinvested abroad shall
be repatriated to the country of origin within 30 days through an authorised
intermediary.
SECTION 3 - Inbound portfolio investment
Article 129. Foreign portfolio investments in CEMAC in the form of equity
investments shall be declared to the Central Bank and the Ministry in charge of
currency and credit at least 30 days before their completion.
Article 130. The terms and conditions for the execution of incoming portfolio
investment operations are specified by Central Bank Instruction.
Article 131. Foreign portfolio investments in CEMAC that constitute a capital
increase resulting from reinvestments of undistributed profits are reported to the
Central Bank and the Ministry in charge of currency and credit within 30 days of
their completion.
Article 132. The transfer of the proceeds of the transfer of foreign portfolio
investments in CEMAC, amounting to more than CFAF 100 million, must be
declared 30 days before its completion to the Central Bank and the Ministry in
charge of currency and credit.
Article 133. Incoming portfolio investments in the form of the acquisition of
CEMAC securities by non-residents are free.
Article 134. The transfer outside CEMAC by a non-resident of the proceeds of
the transfer of CEMAC securities in an amount exceeding CFAF 100 million
æ ËAÇ;
AË" 1917 yaounc"
3t
r_,eiluic tenlrale d,Etudes des Trarsierts i
,r ir: Q,;iv,rt,} la RÉoiertientation Oe* inanie,

--- Page 34 ---
shall be declared to the Central Bank and the Ministry in charge of currency and
credit 30 days before its completion.
Article 135. The file to be submitted to the credit institutions for the transfer of
the proceeds of the sale, interest and repayment of the capital shall include the
documents justiÿing the ownership of the security, the amount to be transferred
and the declaration of the transfer to the Central Bank and the Ministry in charge
of currency and credit.
SECTION 4 - Outgoing portfolio investment
Article 136. Portfolio investments abroad in excess of a threshold set by Central
Bank Instruction are subject to prior approval by the Central Bank.
Portfolio investments abroad, below the threshold, are reported 30 days before
the transaction is carried out.
Article 137. Aî Instruction of the Central Bank sets the terms and conditions for
the settlement of outgoing portfolio investments and the clearance of related files
by credit institutions.
Article 138. Credit institutions may invest, on their own account, in securities
abroad, subject to a declaration to the Central Bank, at the latest 30 days after
completion of the transaction and compliance with the provisions of the banking
regulations in force.
TITLE V. HEDGING AGAINST CURRENCY
RISK
Article 139. The forward curency hedge is in the settlement currency specified
in the contract.
The term of the forward currency hedging contract may not exceed the term of
the contract of the underlying transaction.
Settlement at the end of the forward exchange risk hedging transaction takes
place no later than2 days after the maturity date.
B E^AÇ
14P 1917 Yaoundé
32 [i
l,,illi
-, ;J [î',[,'o',1";ti l,I},iIi:'H "

--- Page 35 ---
Article 140. Forward curency hedging transactions are backed by duly justified
actual economic and financial transactions.
Article 141. Credit institutions are authorised to carry out forward currency
hedging transactions, with reporting to the BEAC, subject to compliance with the
prudential provisions on the supervision of the intemational investment position
of credit institutions laid down by COBAC.
Article 142. Credit institutions are required to immediately cancel foreign
exchange positions that have become dormant when the underiying commercial
transaction is cancelled.
Article 143. Each credit institution shall keep a directory of risk-free hedging
transactions in which it shall keep, for each file domiciled with it, the following
documents:
the commercial contract or the loan contract;
the domiciled import declaration
I
the company's articles of association;
any document containing information on the hedging instrument used by
the approved intermediary;
documents attesting to all hedging transactions and their settlement by
exercising or cancelling terms, with an indication of their respective dates
and amounts.
TITLE VI - COMMUNICATION OF INFORMATION AND REPORTS
OF OPERATIONS WITH THE OUTSIDE WORLD
Article 144. Economic agents carrying out extemal operations shall
communicate to the Central Bank and other competent administrative authorities
all their extemal transactions, whether they concem goods, seruices, donations,
income, transfers or capital. These include national treasuries, the customs
administration, the tax administration, the administrative services in charge of
debt management, any other govemment departments, individuals, approved
intermediaries, intemational organisations and diplomatic representations and any
other legal entity.
Àrticle 145. Economic agents shall communicate to the Central Bank, at its
request, any contract or agreement leading to an operation with the outside worid.
,-? r:--
33
I t:r I 9-i î ÿ;i,,,. r,
'
,,; iruio {"leniral:'I iil':rl,ier
1,, r,.I 1r : r' -

--- Page 36 ---
Article 146. ln accordance with these Regulations, the Central Bank shall define
by instruction the form, nature, periodicity and media as well as other means of
communicating information and periodic reports relating to external transactions.
TITLE VII: CONTROLS, INFRINGEMENTS AND PENALTIES
CHAPTER I: CONTROLS
Article 147. The Central Bank monitors the implementation of exchange rate
regulation by economic agents. The Central Bank may delegate to COBAC or be
assisted by the Ministry in charge of currency and credit and its related
administrations for the control of certain economic agents and transactions under
the conditions and procedures defined in these Regulations and by instructions
from the latter.
Article 148. The Ministry in charge of currency and credit carries out desk and
on-site inspections of the administration of posts and economic agents, other than
credit institutions, microfinance institutions and exchange offices.
However, the Ministry in charge of currency and credit may request information
from approved intermediaries on customer foreign exchange transactions.
Article l49.In accordance with its rules of procedure, COBAC carries out desk
and on-site inspections of credit and microfinance institutions and bureaux de
change as part of its monitoring of foreign exchange regulations.
Article 150. The control of sub-delegated institutions is carried out by credit
institutions, which inform the Central Bank of any deficiencies found.
Article 151. The Ministry in charge of currency and credit and COBAC shall
communicate to the Central Bank the reports or minutes relating to their controls
in respect of the monitoring of exchange regulations...
Article 152. ln the context of their supervisory tasks, the Ministry in charge of
currency and credit, BEAC and COBAC may, if necessary,, request the assistance
of the Regional Financial Market Regulator, GABAC, CIMA or any other
competent body.
ii' ':? iï ''l'1r;1;;iq!.'
', ii,, .' ll l:,r .l ,'i .ir rll ,r 'l -:: it:s i:. ,': :,1 he rtl: nr
,,
34

--- Page 37 ---
CHAPTER II: INFRINGEMENTS AND PENALTIES
SECTION 1- Generalities
Article 153. The BEAC identifies exchange rate violations and imposes
administrative sanctions on offending economic agents.
As part of their assistance to the Central Bank, the Ministry in charge of currency
and credit and COBAC record infringements and, if necessary, impose sanctions
in their respective areas of competence.
Article 154. Failure to comply with the provisions of these Regulations and
subsequent texts exposes offenders to administrative monetary and non-monetary
penalties depending on the nature of the offence and the seriousness of the failure
found.
Regardless of the supervisory authority, the foreign exchange violator cannot be
sanctioned twice for the same offence.
Article 155. The administrative penalties provided for in these Regulations shall
apply, without prejudice to those provided for in the specific regulations in force.
Article 156. The purpose of this Instruction is to define the rules and procedures
for recording infringements of exchange regulations and for implementing the
related sanctions.
SECTION 2- Administrative monetary penalties.
Article 157. Administrative monetary penalties consist of fines, the rate or
amount of which is determined according to the nature of the offences.
The repetition of an offence of the same nature, from one period to another, may
result in a doubling or tripling of the related fine.
Article 158. Failure to comply with the provisions of these Regulations and
subsequent texts exposes offenders to the following fines, grouped by type of
offence.
Article 159. Violations related to violations of obligations relating to the export
ofgoods and services are punishable by the following fines:
-
Failure of the economic agent to direct the import operations of goods or
services . I 0% of the transaction amount; B EAÇ
8,É 1 91 7 Ycou nd .[ fa6 ilSle'
35 ,, ,r,g r"on113tr: i'El;rl0S des
n." Iriri1') li R49;er:e1.i'''1 '11(r'f 2n'"

--- Page 38 ---
Failure of approved intermediaries to clear import files for goods or
set-vices. 5%o of the transaction amount;
Failure by the economic agent to comply with the arm's length principle
applicable to imports of intra-group service: l1Yo of the amount of the
service import.
Non-effectiveness of the service import: 100% of the amount involved.
Article 160. infringements related to violations of obligations relating to the
export ofgoods and services are punishable by the following fines:
Failure of the economic agent to direct the import operalions of goods or
services. 10% of the transaction amount;
failure of the economic agent to repatriate the revenue from the export of
goods or services: llYo of the amount of the unjustified amount,
accompanied, where applicable, by the suspension of the offender's
transfer operations throughout the CEMAC banking system, for a period
ranging from 1 to 9 months..
Failure of approved intermediaries to clear import files for goods or
services. 5% of the transaction amount;
failure to monitor the repatriation of export reÿenues from goods or
services by 30Â of the transaction amount;
repatriation of export earnings by the economic agent to a bank other than
the direct debit bank:2Yo ofthe export amount;
Settlement by approved intermediaries of transactions relating to exports
of goods or services without supporting documents: 10% of the amount of
the unjustified amount, accompanied, where applicable, by the suspension
of the offender's transfer operations throughout the CEMAC banking
system, for a period ranging from 1 to 9 months.
Article 161. The non-retransfer of currency by authorized intermediaries to the
Central Bank constitutes an offence, punishable by a hne of5% of the amount of
curency not retumed, without prejudice to the immediate effective return of the
corresponding curency.
When the non-reversal of foreign curency continues for more than one day, it
constitutes a separate offence for each day during which it continues. As such,
each separate offence is punishable by a fine of 5% of the amount of currency not
retumed corresponding to each day ofnon-return.
:::
r- tl
36

--- Page 39 ---
Article 162. Failure by authorised intermediaries to comply with the thresholds
applicable to extemal transactions constitutes an offence:
-
a f,rne of llYo ofthe amount ofthe transaction for current transactions,
-
a f,ine of l5oÂ of the amount of the transaction for capital transactions.
Article 163. The execution of the transactions listed in this article by credit
institutions without all the supporting documents constitutes an offence,
punishable by the following fines:
Import of foreign cunency by credit institutions: llYo of the amount of
imported currencies, accompanied by the return of the currencies to the
Central Bank against the CFA Franc.
Opening or renewing a foreign currency account in CEMAC for a resident.
10% of credit movements, with immediate retum of foreign currency to the
Central Bank,
Opening or renewing a foreign curuency account in CEMAC for a resident.
l5%o of credit movements, accompanied by the repatriation of the
currencies corresponding to the balance of this account and their
immediate retum to the Central Bank;
capital transactions including loans, securities issues, borrowings, real
estate purchases:20%o of the transaction amount;
Import of gold or a specifically restricted good. l0oÂ of the transaction
amount;
Article 164. The execution of the transactions listed in this article by credit
institutions without all the supporting documents constitutes an offence,
punishable by the following frnes:
- Opening a CFAF account in CEMAC to non-residents. 5Yo of credit
transactions, with immediate closure of the account;
-
Opening a foreign curuency account in CEMAC to non-residents. 50Â of
credit transactions,, with immediate closure of the account;
-
Execution of regulations relating to current or capital transactions. l5oÂ of
the amount of the settled transaction.
Àrticle 165. Failure by approved intermediaries to comply with the procedures
for operating the accounts of residents in foreign currency in the CEMAC
constitutes an offence, punishable by a f,rne of 50Â of the average credit
movements, without being less than CFAF 5 million, accompanied by the
F EAG
37
.
,'l; ,;Tl l,liT.,ilfli,.,i,,tu
: . ' ':i1
i:,in :es Cnan-:,

--- Page 40 ---
immediate closure of the account concerned and the transfer of the foreign
currency corresponding to the balance ofthe said account to the Central Bank.
Article 166. Infringements related to violations of the obligations relating to the
exercise of manual exchange activity below are punishable by a fine of CFAF 5
million, together with the immediate transfer of the currency to the Central Bank:
-
the exercise of manual exchange activity without approval;
-
The continuation of the manual exchange activity after the withdrawal of
approval.
Article 167. Failure to comply with the specifications relating to the activity of
transferring funds constitutes an offence and exposes the offender to the payment
of a fine of CFAF 5 million.
Article 168. Infringements linked to violations of the obligations relating to
manual foreign exchange and travel operations shall be punishable by the
following frnes:
unjustified refusal to sell foreign currency to customers'. 50Â of the amount
requested by the client;
late transJèr o/ currencies by sub-delegated institutions to credit
institutions: 50Â of the amount of the currencies sold late;
non-transfer of foreign curency by residents to authorized intermediaries'.
10% of the amount not transferred, without prejudice to its immediate
transfer to the Central Bank of Currencies against CFA Franc;
failure by travellers to declare to customs sums, in parTicular cash,
negotiable instruments and securities whose amount exceeds the threshold
authorised at the exit and entry of the CEMAC area: 15%o of the amount
exceeding the authorised threshold, accompanied by the confiscation of
undeclared sums and, where applicable, the toois used to conceal them,
without prejudice to the penalties provided for by the reguiations relating
to the fight against money laundering and terrorist hnancing in the
CEMAC.
Article 169. Failure to make subsequent declarations of the transactions listed in
this Article by intermediaries authorised to the competent authorities shall
constitute an offence, punishable by the following fines:
- opening a non-resident account in foreign currency in CEMAC: 100
thousand CFA francs per undeclared account;
38

--- Page 41 ---
opening of an account for non-residents in CFAF in CEMAC: 100
thousand FCFA per undeclared account;
Article 170. Failure to report financial or capital transactions to the competent
authorities in advance constitutes an offence, punishable by a fine of l0% ofthe
amount of the transaction.
Article 171. Failure by intermediaries authorised to report current transactions
and financial or capital transactions to the competent authorities after the event
constitutes an offence, punishable by a fine of 50Â of the amount of the
transaction.
Article 172. Failure by approved intermediaries to comply with the deadlines for
periodic communication of information constitutes an offence, punishable by a
fine of one million CFA francs, increased by 100,000 francs per day of delay
from the date ofthe formal notice notified to the offender.
Article 173. Refusal by the economic agent to communicate to the Central Bank
contracts or agreements involving operations with the outside world constitutes
an offence, punishable by a fine of CFAF 5 million per day of delay,
accompanied, where applicable, by the suspension of transfer operations
throughout the CEMAC banking system.
Article 174. Offences related to obligations relating to the execution of
transactions provided for in this article shall be punishable by the following frnes
payment by approved intermediaries of the due dates for the repayment of
a loan without proof of its repatriation or of the acquisitions made: a ftne
equal to l5Yo of the amount of the transaction;
use of electronic payment instruments outside CEMAC for capital
transactions: a fline equal to l0%o of the amount of the transaction;
opening of escrow or guarantee qccounts by legal entities outside the
booles of the Central Bank: 5%o of the account balance, with the closing of
the account and the return of the currencies corresponding to the said
balance to the Central Bank;
settlement of transactions between residents through bank accounts
domiciled abroad: 20oÂ of the amount of the settled transaction;
Failure by approved intermediaries to comply with the deadline for the
execution of customer transaction settlements: 3%o of the transaction
amount.
B,Ëêr"C
P '1917 ÿ3e5r-,çiç
t-t
u.ellirt i]enlr:ls l'[t'ie; des i,ers]etts
39
;i du Sui'ri oe !a Régiemcrtat or , t: ihznqe'

--- Page 42 ---
Article 175. Failure to comply with the time limit for the payment of the fines
provided for in these Regulations or for the regularisation of the transactions in
question shall result in the application of a penalty of 5Yo for each day of delay,
Article 176. The cumulative financial penalties may not exceed 150lo of the own
funds of authorised intermediaries and 50Yo of the own funds of other economic
operators.
Article 177. The recovery of financial penalties by the Central Bank may be
carried out according to the automatic debit procedure, subj ect to the prior formal
notice, which has remained unsuccessful, of the offending economic agent. In
this respect, the Central Bank may:
automatically debit the accounts of approved intermediaries or economic
agents domiciled in its books;
Order authorised intermediaries to automatically debit the accounts of
offending economic agents domiciled in their books.
Article 178. The sums recovered by way of administrative monetary penalties
shall be divided equally between the Public Treasury of the State in which the
offending economic agent is domiciled or established and the Central Bank.
SECTION 3- Non-monetary administrative penalties.
Article 179. Without prejudice to the application of administrative monetary
penalties, foreign exchange violators are subj ect to the following non-monetary
administrative penalties
:
-
the waming;
-
the blame;
-
the confiscation ofthe offence structure
;
-
the prohibition of certain transfer operations, in particular foreign currency
imports, extemal transfers, foreign currency supply;
-
the suspension of activities;
-
the suspension or dismissal of the officer;
-
temporary closure,
-
suspension ofthe approval or licence
-
The withdrawal of the approval or licence.
Article 180. In the event of serious breaches by an economic agent of exchange
matter$rptl§5
regulations, the Govemor of the Central Bank may refer the
tsP 1917 Yaoundé
40
.,-',e ture Centrale d'Etudes des Ttansletts
q, ", 1e ll R+0leneltaticn 4es than,l"

--- Page 43 ---
the Central African Banking Commission for the purpose of initiating
disciplinary proceedings in the case of approved intermediaries;
The Ministry in charge of currency and credit for the suspension or
withdrawal of the exchange offices' approval or the operating licence of
other economic agents, if applicable.
TITLE VI - SPECIAL, TRANSITIONAL AND FINAL PRO\TSIONS
CHAPTER I: SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
SECTION 1: Escrow, guarantee and related accounts.
Article 181. The Central Bank may open escrow, guarantee and similar accounts
denominated in foreign cuffency in its books to cover the commitments entered
into by States and other legal entities authorised by the Board ofDirectors ofthe
Central Bank to hold accounts therein, in accordance with the relevant provisions
ofits Statute.
The terms and conditions for opening and operating these accounts are defined by
an agreement between the parties.
Article 182. Legal entities govemed by public law may only open escrow and
guarantee accounts and similar accounts in foreign curency in the books of the
Central Bank.
Article 183. In the specific sectors, in particular the oil and gas and mining
sectors, in the event of a legal or contractual obligation to set up a financial
endowment or a financial fund for the rehabilitation of a site in operational terms,
the Central Bank may open, on behalf of the State concemed and its contracting
party or operator, where applicable, accounts in foreign culrency or in CFA
francs, in order to direct the related resources there.
The terms and conditions for opening and operating these accounts are defined by
an agreement between the parties.
(:
iÈ, A
Ë.:
I r-] 1917 yaou ndé
47 .,, ',r, r ,, ,, i r; .m .i:i lu iélr
c
ld e'E ilt eud ne ts
a
ld ioes
r
Transferts
rjes0l.anges

--- Page 44 ---
SECTION 2- Safeguard measures relating to the preservation of
CEMAC's external accounts
Article 184. This Regulation shall apply to all economic agents, without
prejudice to the Treaties and Monetary Cooperation Agreements in force in
CEMAC, which are of public policy nature and in particular the obligation to
repatriate export eamings in full and without exception. To this end, neither the
States nor the Central Bank may derogate from it in their respective regulations
or by agreement.
Article 185. In the event of significant pressure on the extemal accounts, the
Central Bank may take protective measures, in particular the temporary
suspension of certain capital operations.
The maximum duration of these protective measures may not exceed six months.
At the end of this period, if pressure persists, the Central Bank refers the matter to
the Board of Directors with a view to finding appropriate solutions to resolve the
crisis.
Article 186. Without prejudice to compliance with the Monetary Cooperation
Agreements, when circumstances so require, and more particularly the marked
deterioration in the situation of the Zone's external assets, the crisis or any other
serious dysfunction affecting the balance of CEMAC's external accounts, the
IIMAC Ministerial Committee may temporarily adjust or suspend certain
provisions ofthese Regulations in the Zone for a specihed period'
To this end, the Ministerial Committee shall be convened at the request of the
BEAC Board of Directors, on the proposal of the Central Bank Government,
acting on its own initiative or at the request of one of the Member States.
Article 187. The Central Bank may, in the event of exhaustion of the common
extemal funds of the UMAC Member States, order the transfer to it in exchange
for CFA francs of extemal funds in Euros or other currencies held by all public or
private bodies in the UMAC Member States.
The Central Bank may limit the call provided for in paragraph l of this article to
public bodies and credit institutions only and may exercise it as a matter of
priority in States whose extemal transactions affecting the common extemal
position show a deficit balance.
42

--- Page 45 ---
The terms and conditions for the implementation of this article shall be specified
by the BEAC Board of Directors, on a proposal from the Central Bank
Govemment.
CHAPTER II: TRANSITIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS
Article 188. CEMAC's foreign exchange regulations are available from the
Central Bank, the relevant departments of the Ministry of Currency and Credit
and approved intermediaries, who make them available to their users on request.
Article 189. The Ministry of currency and Credit, BEAC and COBAC meet at
least once a year to assess the implementation of CEMAC's exchange regulations
in each Member State.
The meetings are convened at the initiative of BEAC, which provides the
secretariat.
Article 190. The BEAC may give advisory opinions on the interpretation of all or
part of the provisions of these Regulations.
Article 191. For the application and interpretation of these Regulations, the
BEAC issues Instructions, circular letters, notices and explanatory notes.
Article 192. These Regulations may be amended by the UMAC Ministerial
Committee.
Article 193. Economic agents, including authorised intermediaries, shall have six
months from the date of entry into force of this Regulation to comply with its
provisions.
Article 194. This Regulation repeals Regulation
No.
121}Ù1CEMACruMAC/UMAC/CM of 29 April 2000 harmonizing exchange
regulations in the CEMAC Member States and all other previous texts to the
contrary relating to the same subject.
EIÊ?\r-s
r* Ù- ,È\ \_-
irlp 1912 yeourrdé
43 i,;lt,ilu Cenlmle,1'EilCes des Trarslerls
ji0L SLriv: de l: llégieiiieltalion des 0harrge,

--- Page 46 ---
Article 195. These Regulations are drawn up in a single copy in the English,
French, Spanish and Arabic languages, the French text being authoritative in the
event ofany discrepancy. It shall enter into force on I March 2019 and shall be
published in the Official Bulletin of the CEMAC. /-
Done at Yaoundé, on the 2lst December 2018
The Chairman of the Ministerial Committee,
Jean-Marie OGANDAGA
B EAG
tsF. 1917 Yaoundé
..rrturr Ccnlraled'EtudesdesTranslerts
.:,1i j,r;! qÉ h IiJllrtentltion des ()hange:
44