Source PDF : Instruction_n°002_GR_2022_specifying_the_conditions_and_modalities_for_opening_and_operati_c56859a5.pdf
Chemin original : scraping\beac_data\P Des Changes\Instructions\Instruction_n°002_GR_2022_specifying_the_conditions_and_modalities_for_opening_and_operati_c56859a5.pdf
Date extraction : 15/06/2026 23:22:30
======================================================================

--- Page 1 ---
BANK OF CENTRAL Yaounde, the 4th Februarv 2022
AFRICAN STATES
Thç Govsrnor
INSTRUCTION NO OO3IGW2O22
Specifying the conditions and modalities for opening and operating foreign
currency accounts of resident extractive companies.
The Governor,
Having regard to the Statutes of BEAC in force;
Having regard to Regulation N' 02118/CEMACruMAC/CM du f 21 December 2018 on
the regulation of foreign exchange in CEMAC;
Having regard to Regulation No. 0 I /2 1/CEMAC/UMAC/CM of 23 December 2021 on
the modalities of implementation of certain provisions of the foreign exchange
regulations by resident extractive companies;
Having regard to Instruction No.005/GR/2019 of l0 June 2019 on the conditions and
modalities of operation of foreign currency accounts ofresidents and non-residents;
Considering the specificity and complexity of activities in the CEMAC extractive sector;
Considering the need for a full and harmonious application of exchange regulations tn
conformity with the monetary cooperation agreements in force,
Issues the following I nstruction:
l:
Section General provisions
Article 1. - The purpose ofthis Instruction is to specifu the specific rules and procedures
applicable to the opening, regularisation and operation of loreign currency accounts of
resident extractive companies.
Extractive companies are defined in the Regulation on the implemen certaln
provisions of the foreign exchange regulations by resident extractive
sERvlc
èelruuxj
/*.
'd...
t9t7tÀ

--- Page 2 ---
Article 2. - This Instruction applies to extractive companies instead of Instruction
n"005/GR/2019 of l0 June 2019 on the terms and conditions for opening and operating
loreign currency accounts of residents and non-residents.
Only the provisions of this Instruction relating to foreign currency accounts in CEMAC
shall apply to transporters and subcontractors of resident extractive corrpanies as
defined by this Instruction in Anicle 3, subject to its provisions in Article 10.
Article 3. - Within the meaning of this Instruction:
Transporters means companies transporting hydrocarbons or minerals from
third countries by pipeline, as well as companies or undertakings operating,
on a principal basis, pipelines, installations or other equipment or any means
of transporting hydrocarbons and minerals from the production sites of
extractive companies to processing and transformation plants or to an export
terminal. The activity is considered principal when the turnover resulting from
the transport of hydrocarbons or minerals exceeds 50Vo of the transporter's
total turnover;
subcontractors are resident enterprises or companies whose main activity is
related to the execution ofa contract or agreement with one or more extractive
industries relating to the fulfilment of the corporate purpose or the execution
of a contract of an extractive industry company. The activity is considered
principal when the tumover resulting from the performance of the contractual
services with the company exceeds 50% of the total tumover of the
subcontractor.
In the context of this Instruction, extractive companies, subcontractors and transporters
are referred to together as "extractive sector companies".
Article 4. - Companies in the extractive sector may open loreign currency accounts ln
CEMAC, after prior authorisation by the Central Bank, under the terms and conditions
set out in this Instruction.
Only extractive companies may open foreign currency accounts outside CEMAC, after
prior authorisation by the Central Bank, under the terms and conditions set out in this
Instruction.
Section 2: Opening foreign currency âccounts
Article 5. - Prior to opening a foreign exchange account within or outside CEMAC, the
extractive sector company must submit a request for prior authorts c Central
k,
SERVIC
2 CETiIRAU)
l9t7\

--- Page 3 ---
Services of the central Bank in Yaoundé, Republic of cameroon, stating the following
inforrnation:
- name of the applicant company;
- account currency;
- motivation of the application;
- transactions that may be debited or credited to the cunency account.
The application for prior authorisation shall also be accompanied by the following
documents:
- an extract from the Trade and Personal Property Credit Register dated less than 3
months ago;
- the Articles of Association ofthe applicant company and, where appropriate, those
of the parent company;
- the identity of the applicant company's directors and principal shareholders;
- the agreements signed with the State and, where applicable, the joint operating
agreement with one or more partners;
- the financial statements for the applicant company's last completed financial year;
- where applicable, external loan contracts and related repayment schedules.
Article 6. - The prior authorisation application file is transmitted electronically to the
Central Bank's Central Services, which acknowledge receipt.
If the Central Bank does not receive any request lor additional information within 14
days olits receipt, the application for authorisation shall be deemed complete.
Article 7. - The Central Bank's authorisation is notified to the applicant extractive sector
company within thirty (30) days of the acknowledgement of receipt of the complete file,
within the meaning of paragraph 2 of Article 6 of this Instruction.
If the necessary information was not provided at the time of the application for
authorisation, BEAC may, in the context of the examination of the file, request the
applicant to produce the missing information.
Any request for additional information by the Central Bank suspends the processing
time of the file by 30 days until the date of actual transmission of the requested
information.
d0
sERvrcEs \-â
CE'TRAU). I;
3
9t7\l

--- Page 4 ---
At the end olthe thirty (30) day period provided for in the first paragraph of this article,
the central Bank's lailure to reply shall constitute authorisation to open the foreign
currency account. The applicant company in the extractive sector takes note, by
correspondence addressed to the Central Bank, of the tacit authorisation to open the
foreign currency account.
Article 8. - in the event of a formal response within the thirty (30) day period provided
for in Article 7 of this Instruction, the Central Bank's reasoned decision shall be notified
to the requesting extractive sector undertaking by any means in writing.
Where the response is favourable, the notiflcation lrom the Central Bank specifies the
operations that the extractive sector company is authorised to carry out on the authorised
currency account.
Any new category ofoperations on the authorised account shall be notified to the Central
Bank and shall be deemed approved if they comply with the foreign exchange
regulations in force.
Article 9. - Any new category ofoperations on an authorised foreign currency account,
admitted by the Central Bank in favour of â company in the extractive sector, is
automatically extended to all foreign currency accounts of the same nafure in the sector
concemed.
Article 10. - The authorisation of the foreign currency account is valid for the duration
of the purpose of the account, subject to compliance with the periodic reporting
obligations to the Central Bank on the part of the extractive sector company.
Section 3 - Transitional provisions for the regularisation of existing foreign
currency accounts
Article ll. - Exceptionally, the regularisation of loreign currency accounts of
companies in the extractive sector opened inside or outside CEMAC, without prior
authorisation lrom the Central Bank, is authorised before the entry into force of this
Instruction.
Within the meaning of this Instruction, regularisation consists in sending to the Central
Bank's Central Services, no later than 3l January 2022, a complete file including, in
addition to the request for regularisation and the history of the account to be regularised
since it was opened or over the last twelve (12) months when the account was opened
less than twelve ( 12) months ago, the information and documents required for the
opening of foreign currency accounts as provided lor in Article Instruction.
de/
\
SERVICES
CÉNTRAUX
4
171

--- Page 5 ---
Article 12. - During the entire period of examination of the regularisation file by the
central Bank, the foreign currency accounts to be regularised ofthe applicant extractive
company are deemed authorised.
Article 13. - Extractive sector companies holding loreign currency accounts to be
regularised have a period of ten ( I 0) months from 3 I January 2022 to fully comply with
the provisions of this Instruction.
During the period provided for in the first paragraph of this Article, foreign currency
accounts to be regularised for which the Central Bank has been duly notified shall
continue to operate, without exposing their holders to sanctions for non-compliance with
foreign exchange regulations, without prejudice to the application of Article 15 of this
Instruction.
Article 14. - The file for the regularisation of a foreign currency account is processed
by the Central Bank under the same conditions of deadlines as the request for prior
authorisation to open a loreign cuffency account provided for in Article 7 of this
Instruction.
Article I5. - In the event that BEAC observes operations that do not comply with foreign
exchange regulations prior to the date olentry into force of this Instruction, a period of
three (03) months is granted to the extractive sector companies concerned to take the
necessary corrective action. This period may be extended upon a reasoned request lrom
the resident extractive sector company to the Central Bank.
Article 16. - The sanctions provided for by the loreign exchange regulations in force are
not applicable to transactions carried out in foreign currency accounts existing prior to
the date ol entry into force of this Instruction, subject to the ten (10) month compliance
period provided lor therein.
Scction 4: How foreign currency accounts lvork
Article 17. - Foreign currency accounts are intended lor transactions necessary for the
activities of companies in the extractive sector resulting from legal or contractual
obligations. They may also receive any other transaction essential to their activity in
accordance with foreign exchange regulations.
Article 18. - Any new category ofoperations on an authorised foreign curency account
admitted by the Central Bank in favour of a company in the extractive sector is
automatically extended to all foreign currency accounts of other companies in the
extractive sector, as provided for in Article 8 of this Instruction.
de 'A
v/cEs
TRÀUX
\
5
9t7\

--- Page 6 ---
Article 19. - Foreign currency accounts in CEMAC may be opened in any Credit
Institution in cEMAC, regardless ofthe country of establishment of the extractive sector
company concemed.
Operations on foreign currency accounts in CEMAC are carried out freely, subject to
verification by the credit Institutions of their compliance with the regulations in force,
in particular the provisions relating to the Decisions authorising the opening of such
accounts.
Transactions between foreign currency accounts in CEMAC of companies in the
extractive sector are free, subject to the obligation ofperiodic declaration to the Central
Bank.
Subject to their conversion into CFA Francs, cash withdrawals from accounts opened in
CEMAC cannot be made to cover local needs relating to local tax obligations and social
contributions, as well as any other local contribution provided for in oil and mining
contracts.
All transactions on foreign curency accounts in CEMAC are subject to periodic
monthly reporting to the Central Bank by Credit Institutions.
Article 20. - Foreign currency accounts in CEMAC are supplied with currency from:
-
export eamings;
- foreign currency financing operations carried out by the extractive sector
company, including loans, cash pooling operations and capital contributions;
-
interest and related investment income;
-
any other revenue or payment.
Foreign currency accounts in CEMAC can be debited freely for:
-
the total or partial settlement of foreign trade operations inherent in the activity
of the extractive sector company and any other authorised operation;
-
the payment of interest and repayment of loans taken out for the purposes ofthe
extractive sector company's activities;
-
cash pooling operations in CEMAC;
-
fund-raising operations;
-
dividend payments and distributions ofany other nature;
- investment operations carried out in compliance with foreign exchange
regulations;
-
payments to an account in CFA francs, including for local needs related to local
tax obligations and social contributions;
ll t'4
the crediting of a foreign currency account in C
w
SERYICES
CENTRAUX
!
6

--- Page 7 ---
-
any other operation necessary lor the needs of their activities, with the exception
of operations prohibited by exchange regulations.
The performance of cash pooling operations outside CEMAC from foreign curency
accounts opened in CEMAC is subject to the prior authorisation of the Central Bank.
Article 21,- The fees and commissions levied directly by credit Institutions on each
operation carried out from the foreign currency accounts ofcompanies in the extractive
sector in CEMAC may not exceed the amount of one hundred thousand (100 000) CFA
francs.
Article 22. - Foreign currency accounts outside CEMAC cannot be used to settle
transactions between resident extractive companies, in accordance with Article 30 of
Regulation No. 02l I 8/CEMAC/UMAC/CM of 2 I December 20 I 8 on foreign exchange
regulations in CEMAC, except for the sole purpose of making calls for funds.
Article 23.- Foreign currency accounts outside CEMAC are supplied with currency
from:
-
the extractive company's export eamings;
-
foreign currency financing operations carried out by the extractive company,
including loans, cash pooling operations and capital contributions;
-
interest and related investment income;
-
any other revenue or payment.
Foreign currency accounts outside CEMAC can be debited freely, especially for:
-
the total or partial settlement of foreign trade operations inherent to the activity
of the extractive company as well as any other authorised operation;
-
the payment olinterest and the repayment ofloans taken out for the needs of its
activities;
-
cash pooling operations ofthe extractive company;
-
dividend payments and distributions of any other nature to be made by the
extractive company;
- investment operations carried out in compliance with foreign exchange
regulations;
-
calls for funds;
-
the crediting of a foreign curency account in CEMAC;
-
the crediting of another foreign currency account outside the CEMAC of the
same holder;
-
any other operation necessary for the needs of their activities, with the exception
ofoperations prohibited by the exchange regulations in force.
All debit and credit transactions are subject to periodic ng by the
extractive companies concerned to the Central Bank.
sERylcEs
CENTRAUX
7
I7YÀ

--- Page 8 ---
Article 24. - In addition to the periodic declaration ofextractive companies provided for
in paragraph 5 of Article 19 of this Instruction, the Central Bank may, at any time,
request from the holder of the foreign currency account information relating to the
operations carried out on the said account.
Section 5: Miscellaneous and final provisions
Article 25. - Companies in the extractive sector shall transmit to the Central Bank
periodic declarations on the operations carried out on foreign cuffency accounts, as
provided for in this Instruction, in accordance with the modalities and format specified
in a Circular Letter lrom the Governor of the Central Bank.
Article 26. - Extractive companies shall communicate to the Central Bank, on a
quarterly basis, information on transactions related to payments in kind to residents by
production sharing, allowing in particular the identification of the recipient party or
parties.
Article 27. - In case olclosure of a foreign curency account outside CEMAC, the credit
balance shall be repatriated within thirty (30) days in a CEMAC Member State and
returned to BEAC with the corresponding value in CFA francs. The credit balance may
also be transferred to another active currency account, inside or outside CEMAC, duly
authorised by the Central Bank.
In case of closure of a foreign currency account in CEMAC, the credit balance shall be
transferred either to a CFA Franc account with transfer of the corresponding currencies
to the Credit Institution holding the account and retrocession ofthese currencies to the
Central Bank, or to another foreign currency account in CEMAC, subject to information
of the Central Bank.
Article 28, - Periodic controls are carried out by the Central Bank to ensure compliance
rvith the provisions of this Instruction.
Article 29. - Any failure to comply with this Instruction shall be recorded and sanctioned
in accordance with the provisions of the foreign exchange regulations in force.
Article 30. - This Instruction may be amended by the Central Bank. It may be specified
in a Circular Letter lrom the Govemor of the Central Bank.
Article 31. - This Instruction cancels and replaces Instruction n'006/Gfu2021 of l3
December 2021 speciÿing the conditions and modalities for opening and operating
loreign currency accounts of resident extractive companies. It enters into fbrce on the
date of signature.
\ ABBAS MAHAMAT TOLLI
§ËR'/icFi
CÈft-,1R1Uà
-/^\.
et71N