Source PDF : Instruction_n°003_GR_2020_specifying_the_conditions_and_modalities_for_carrying_out_operat_018f5772.pdf
Chemin original : scraping\beac_data\P Des Changes\Instructions\Instruction_n°003_GR_2020_specifying_the_conditions_and_modalities_for_carrying_out_operat_018f5772.pdf
Date extraction : 15/06/2026 23:24:26
======================================================================

--- Page 1 ---
BANK OF CENTRAL Yaoundé, October 5, 2020
AFRICAN STATES
The Governor
|NSTRUCT|ON NO. 003 I cRl 2O2O
Specifying the conditions and modalities for carrying out operations relating to
direct and portfolio investments with foreign countries
THE GOVERNOR,
Having regard to the Statutes of the Bank of Central African States in force;
Having regard to Regulation No. 02l18/CEMAC/UMAC/CM of 2L December 2018 on
foreign exchange regulations in CEMAC;
Having regard to Regulation No. 01/CEMAC/UMAC/CM of 11 April 2016 on the
prevention and suppression of money laundering and terrorist financing and
proliferation;
Pursuant to Article 17 of the said Regulation,
HEREBY ISSUES THE FOLLOWING INSTRUCTION:
Article 1. - This lnstruction defines the conditions and modalities for carrying out
operations relating to direct and portfolio investments with foreign countries.
Article 2. - Direct and portfolio investments with foreign countries are free.
Title l. - Foreign Direct lnvestments
Article 3 - The following are considered as direct investments
- the acquisition of holdings or subscriptions of shares in existing or new companies for
amounts representing at least 10% of the capital of the inVeSt pa ny
- acquisitions of real estate;
sEQ 19712020

--- Page 2 ---
- investments in a company under the control or indirect influence of the investment
firm, in related companies as well as debts between related companies, with the
exception of those between credit institutions.
Section 1. - lnward Direct Investments
Article 4. - Direct investments from abroad in GEMAC are declared by the investor or
his agent to the central Bank and the Ministry in charge of money and credit at least
30 days before they a re made.
Article 5. - The transfer of the proceeds of the liquidation or disposal of Foreign Direct
lnvestments in CEMAC is declared to the Central Bank and the Ministry in charge of
money and credit at least 30 days before it is carried out.
Article 6, - Upon receipt of the declaration referred to in Articles 3 and 4 of this
lnstruction, the Central Bank shall examine their conformity, in particular with regard
to foreign exchange regulations and regulations relating to the fight against money
laundering and the financing of terrorism.
At the end of this examination, the Central Bank takes note of the declaration if it
complies with the provisions referred to in the first paragraph of this Article. Failing
this, BEAC may request additional information, require the implementation of
add itiona I measures to ensure the com pliance of the reported operation or oppose the
implementation of the said operation.
Article 7 - Credit institutions shall execute requests for the transfer of proceeds from
the Iiquidation or disposal of investments on the basis of a transfer file containing the
supporting documents required for the execution of the operation, proof of the prior
declaration of the operation to be carried out to BEAC and the Ministry in charge of
money and cred it.
Section 2. - Outward Direct lnvestments
Article 8. - Direct investments abroad are subject to prior authorisation by the Central
Bank. To this end, the investor or his agent shall submit to the Central Bank an
application for prior authorisation of the planned operation, accompanied by the
releva nt su pporting docu ments.
ln the case of an application for authorisation of an Outward Direct lnvestment in the
form of a real estate acquisition initiated by a natural person for housing purposes, the
file includes, in addition to the required supporting d , the application for
authorisation of the transfer of funds intended for I n crng.
,N"
:SEQ797l2O2O

--- Page 3 ---
Article 9. - The application for authorisation of the outward Direct lnvestment shall
specify the account of the beneficiary of the related payment, which may under no
circumstances be that of the originator or a person linked to the originator.
Persons related to the principal include its subsidiaries, affiliates or any entities over
which, including ad hoc structures, he exercises control or which exercise control over
him.
Article 10. - Transfers in respect of real estate acquisitions shall be made exclusively to
the seller, a real estate company, a deposit and consignment institution or a notary's
office.
-
Article 11. Within the framework of the examination of the application for
authorisation of the Outward Direct lnvestment, the Central Bank reserves the right to
request any other document it deems useful.
Article 12, - The Central Bank has a period of 60 working days from the receipt of the
complete application for authorisation of the Outward Direct lnvestment to give its
decision. This period is 30 working days for applications for authorisation of Outward
Direct lnvestments in the form of real estate acquisition for residential purposes by
natural pe rsons.
Where the file is incomplete, the Central Bank informs the investor or his
representative in writing and invites him to provide the missing information or
documents. Any request for additional information suspends the time limit for
examining the file until the requested information is received.
ln the absence of a decision by the Central Bank at the end of the period provided for
in paragraph 1 of this Article, the authorisation is deemed to be granted.
Article 13. - ln order to decide on the application for authorisation of an Outward Direct
lnvestment, the Central Bank shall assess, in addition to the completeness of the file,
the relevance of the information provided, the capacity of the investment, during the
period it is held by the resident, to generate income likely to be repatriated or to avoid
potential outflows of foreign currency for CEMAC.
ln the case of an application for authorisation for Outward Direct lnvestment in the
form of real estate acquisition abroad, the Central Bank also assesses, in particular, the
use to which the real estate is put and its interest for the resident. ln this respect, it
takes into account the financial situation of the resident as well as all information
justifying the acquisition. lt verifies the conditions for the repatriation of any income
likely to be generated by the planned acquisition or its subsequent disposal.
The Central Bank shall also ensure that the Outgoing Dire nt complies with
the anti-money laundering and anti-terrorist financing ràtion provisions.
: SEQ 19712020

--- Page 4 ---
Article 14. - The reasoned decision of the Central Bank is notified to the investor or his
agent with a copy to the domiciliary bank and, for information purposes, when it
is
favorable to the Ministry in charge of money and credit.
-
Article 15. credit lnstitutions execute transfers relating to outward Direct
lnvestments, on the basis of transfer files containing all the required supporting
elements. For outgoing Direct lnvestments in the form of acquisition of real estate by
natural persons for housing purposes, the Central Bank's authorisation is equivalent to
a transfer authorisation, subject to compliance with specific requirements relating to
the execution, in particular ceilings.
Article 16, - The investor shall provide the domiciliary bank for the purposes of
discharging the Outgoing Direct lnvestment file with:
- any document attesting to the effective completion of the authorised operation for
equity investment files;
- a copy of the notarised deed of sale and the final title deed, no later than one year
after the transaction, for real estate acquisition files.
Title Il, - Portfolio investments
Article 17. - The following are considered as portfolio investments:
- the acquisition of holdings or subscriptions of shares in existing or new companies for
amounts of less than 10% of the capital of the investment company;
- debt securities other than equity securities and real estate acquisitions.
Section 1. - lncoming portfolio investments
Article 18, - Foreign portfolio investments in CEMAC in the form of equity investments
are declared to the Central Bank and the Ministry in charge of money and credit at
least 30 days before they are made.
Article 19. - ln the event of the transfer of a portfolio investment, Credit lnstitutions
shall execute requests for the transfer of the related proceeds, on the basis of a
transfer file containing the relevant supporting documents.
Article 20, - lncoming portfolio investments in the form of acquisition of CEMAC
securities by non-residents are free.
//
N' : SEQ t97l2O2O

--- Page 5 ---
Article 21. - The transfer out of GEMAC by a non-resident of the proceeds of the sale
of cEMAC securities in an amount exceeding CFAF 100 million is declared to the central
Bank and the Ministry in charge of money and credit 30 days before it is carried out.
Article 22. - upon receipt of the declaration referred to in Articles 17 and 21 of this
lnstruction, the Central Bank shall examine their conformity, particularly with regard
to foreign exchange regulations and regulations relating to the fight against money
laundering and the financing of terrorism.
At the end of this examination, the Central Bank takes note of the declaration if it
complies with the provisions referred to in the first paragraph of this article. Failing
this, BEAC may request additional information, require the implementation of
additional measures to ensure the compliance of the reported operation or oppose the
implementation of the said operation.
Article 23. - Credit lnstitutions sha ll execute requests for the transfer of proceeds from
the sale of securities, interest and capital repayment on the basis of a transfer file
containing the supporting documents specified by a Circular Letter from the Governor
of the Central Bank.
Section 2- Outgoing portfolio investments
Article 24. - Outgoing portfolio investments amounting to less than CFAF 20 million per
Eccnomic Agent and per year are free, subject to a prior declaration to the Central
Bank and the Ministry in charge of money and credit at least 30 days before the
operation.
Article 25. - Outgoing portfolio investments of more than CFAF 20 million are subject
to prior authorisation by the Central Bank.
To this end, the investor or his agent shall submit to the Central Bank a reasoned
application for prior authorisation, accompanied by a file containing supporting
documents relating to the realisation of the said investment, in particular those
provided for in the Circular Letter of the Governor of the Central Bank.
Article 26. - The Central Bank has a period of 60 working days from the receipt of the
complete application file for authorisation of the Outward Direct lnvestment to give its
d ecision.
Where the file is incomplete, the Central Bank shall inf rm the investor or his agent in
writing and invite him to provide the missing in cuments. Any req u est
\6'
\\"x
N" : SEQ t97l2o2Ù

--- Page 6 ---
for additional information suspends the time limit for examining the file until the
requested information is received.
ln the absence of a decision by the Central Bank at the end of the period provided for
in paragraph 1 of this Article, the authorisation is deemed to be granted.
Article 27. - ln order to decide on the application for authorisation of the outgoing
portfolio investment, the Central Bank shall assess, in addition to the completeness of
the file, the relevance of the information provided, the capacity of the investment,
during the period it is held by the resident, to generate income likely to be repatriated
or to avoid potential outflows of foreign currency for CEMAC. lt verifies the conditions
for repatriation of the sums invested at the end of the investment operation.
The Central Bank shall also ensure that the outgoing portfolio investment complies
with the anti-money Iaundering and anti-terrorist financing and proliferation
provisions.
Article 28. - The Central Bank's reasoned decision is notified to the investor or his
agent, with a copy to the domiciliary bank and, for information purposes, to the
Ministry in charge of money and credit.
Article 29. - Credit lnstitutions shall execute transfer requests relating to outgoing
portfolio investments, on the basis of a transfer file containing the supporting
documents provided for this purpose, in particular the prior authorisation of the
Central Ba nk.
For the purposes of clearing the file, in addition to the required supporting documents,
the originator shall provide any document attestinB to the ownership of the security.
Article 30. - Credit lnstitutions may invest, on their own account, in securities abroad,
subject to a declaration to the Central Bank no later than 30 days after the completion
of the operation.
TITLE lll - Miscellaneous and final provisions
Article 31. - The supporting documents required for the declaration, prior
authorisation or execution oftransfers related to the realisation oftransactions related
to direct and portfolio investments are defined by Circular Letters of the Central Bank.
Article 32. - Any failure to comply with the provisions of this lnstruction exposes the
offender to the sanctions provided for by the regulations in force.
Article 33. - This lnstruction may be amended by the Central Bank. lt may be specified
by a Circular Letter of the Central Bank \
w,
I
N" : SEQ L97l2O2O

--- Page 7 ---
Article 34. - This lnstruction, which abrogates any previous provision on the same
subject, comes into force as from its signature date. lt shall be notified to Credit
lnstitutions as well as to professional associations of CEMAC Credit lnstitutions. /-
ABBAS MAHAMAT TOTLI
N" : SEQ L97l2O2O