Source PDF : Instruction_n°001_GR_2022_specifying_the_conditions_and_modalities_of_declaration,_domicil_83d336cb.pdf
Chemin original : scraping\beac_data\P Des Changes\Instructions\Instruction_n°001_GR_2022_specifying_the_conditions_and_modalities_of_declaration,_domicil_83d336cb.pdf
Date extraction : 15/06/2026 23:23:53
======================================================================

--- Page 1 ---
BANK OF CENTRAI, Yaounde, the 4th February 2022
AFRICAN STATES
Thç Governor
INSTRUCTION NOOOI /GR/2022
Specdying tlte conditions ond modalities of decloration, domiciliotion,
paymenl and clearunce of imporls ofgoods and services by extractive
compon tes
The Governor,
Having regard to the Statutes of BEAC in force;
Having regard to the CEMAC Customs Code Regulation;
Having regard to Regulation No. 02118/CEMACruMAC/CM of 2l December 2018 on
the regulation of foreign exchange in CEMAC;
Having regard to Regulation No. 01/21ICEMAC/UMAC/CM of 23 December 2021 on
the modalities of implementation of certain provisions of the foreign exchange
regulations by residcnt exlractive companies:
Having regard to Instruction No.007/CR/2019 of l0 June 2019 speciÿing the
conditions and modalities of declaration, domiciliation and payment of imports of goods
and services;
Considering the specificity and complexity of activities in the CEMAC extractive sector;
Considering the need for a full and harmonious application of exchange regulations in
conformity with the monetary cooperation agreements in force,
Issues the following Instruction:
Section 1: General provisions
Article l. - The purpose ol this Instruction is to specifu the conditions and modalities
for the declaration, domiciliation, payment and clearance of imp s and
scrv ices by cxtractive companies.
3E[Yi'^"i
ê
!9t71

--- Page 2 ---
Extractive companies are defined in the Regulation on the implementation of certain
provisions of the foreign exchange regulations by resident extractive companies.
Article 2, - This Instruction applies to import operations carried out by extractive
companies instead of Instruction n'007/GR/2019 of l0 June 2019 speciÿing the
conditions and modalities of declaration, domiciliation and payment of imports of goods
and services.
Only the provisions olthis Instruction relating to imports settled from foreign currency
accounts in the CEMAC apply to transporters and subcontractors ofresident extractive
companies as defined in paragraph 3 ol this article.
Within the meaning of this Instruction:
Transporters means companies transporting hydrocarbons or minerals from third
countries by pipeline, as well as companies or undertakings operating, on a
principal basis, pipelines, installations or other equipment or any means of
transporting hydrocarbons and minerals from the production sites of extractive
companies to processing and translormation plants or to an export terminal. The
activity is considered principal when the tumover resulting from the transport of
hydrocarbons or minerals exceeds 50% of the transporter's total tumover;
subcontractors are resident enterprises or companies whose main activity is
related to the execution of a contract or agreement with one or more extractive
industries relating to the lulfilment of the corporate purpose or the execution of
a contract ofan extractive industry company. The activity is considered principal
when the turnover resulting from the performance ofthe contractual services with
the company exceeds 50% of the total turnover of the subcontractor.
In the context of this Instruction, where appropriate, extractive companies,
subcontractors and transporters are referred to together as "extractive sector companies".
Article 3. - Any export of goods or services, canied out by an extractive company,
subject to the obligation of domiciliation, is declared to the Central Bank under the terms
and conditions provided for in this Instruction.
Article 4. - Any import of goods and services by a cornpany in the extractive sector
whose FOB value, determined in accordance with the provisions of CEMAC Customs
Code, is at least equal to ten ( l0) million CFA francs, shall be domiciled in accordance
rvith the conditions and procedures defined in this Instruction.
Article 5, - The follorving transactions involving the import olgoods are exempt from
the direct debit requirement:
-
purchase ofgoods under customs control;
Æ
- grants to CEMAC States; ,W/êy sERyrcEs \e\'
tt5[ cavrnnu.x /$l
2

--- Page 3 ---
shipments addressed to intemational humanitarian organisations established in
CEMAC, directly and without intermediary, admirted duty lree;
returned goods or reimported goods for which no payment is due;
used fumiture and equipment imported as a result of removats, including animals,
motor vehicles and a[[ other items, as well as duly justified donations received
abroad;
spare parts supplied free ofcharge by foreign manulacturers to replace defective
parts.
Section 2: Declaration and domiciliation of imports of goods and services
paid from an account in CEMAC
Article 6. - The declaration of imports of goods or services paid from an account in
CEMAC shall be made in accordance with the model form attached to this Instruction.
Credit Institutions collect on behalf of the Central Bank the declaration forms for the
import of goods and services completed by companies in the extractive sector. In this
respect, they carry out only the usual checks on the formal conformity and completeness
ol the documents required.
Article 7. - The domiciliary Credit Institution shall keep a cumulative register of
declarations of imports of goods and services by companies in the extractive sector
which it shall make available to the Central Bank.
Article 8. - Imports of goods and services made by companies in the extractive sector
an<i settled from an account in CEMAC are domiciled with the Credit Institution holding
the account, at the latest on the day of payment.
Imports of goods and services domiciled and paid for by bank transfer from an account
in CEMAC rnay give rise to the deduction by Credit Institutions. per transaction, of a
fixed and single commission of a maximum amount of one hundred thousand (100,000)
CFA Francs. This fee covers all costs related to the transaction concemed, including
transfer costs.
Article 9. - The domiciliation is carried out in a single operation by transmitting to the
Credit Institution holding the account in the CEMAC, referred to as the "Domiciliary
Credit Institution", all of the following documents, as applicable:
For an import ofgoods:
the import declaration in accordance with the attached f'orm;
,§
the Proforma Invoice or order form;
the contract, where applicable; :,iilîîi
the tax identification number or any document in lieu thereof; ti
§
3
ÂoJ

--- Page 4 ---
-
the authorisation olthe competent authority for restricted products, ifapplicable.
For an irnDort ol servi c es:
-
the import declaration in accordance with the attached form;
-
the Proforma Invoice or order form;
-
where applicable, the contract duly registered with the tax authorities if the local
law provides lor such registration and the extractive sector company does not benefit
from an exemption. If the service contract is not registered at the time ol
domiciliation where this is a legal obligation, the extractive sector company
concerned shall register it before the deadline for discharge ofthe service set out in
Article 20 of this Instruction.
Article 10. - The domiciliation may be carried out in any CEMAC Credit Institution,
regardless of the country of establishment of the extractive sector company concerned
or the country into which the goods or services are imported.
ll.
Article - Once the documents listed in Article 9 of this Instruction have been sent
by the company in the extractive sector, the Domiciliary Credit Institution shall
immediately issue a Certificate of Domiciliation or any document in lieu thereof,
indicating the references of the domiciliation ofthe import ofgoods or services.
Article 12. - The Domiciliary Credit Institution shall open a direct debit file for each
import of goods or services in accordance with the provisions of this Instruction.
Section 3: Declaration and domiciliation of imports of goods and services
paid from an account outside CEMAC
Article 13. - Imports ofgoods and services made by extractive companies and paid from
an account outside CEMAC are declared by them on a quarterly basis to the National
Directorate of the Central Bank of the country of establishment.
The quarterly declaration shall be sent within sixty (60) days of the end of the quarter
concerned.
The content and modalities of transmission of the quarterly declaration of imports of
goods and services are specified by a Circular Lelter of the Govemor of the Central
Bank.
The declaration by extractive companies of imports to the National Directorate of BEAC
in the country where the company is located constitutes the domiciliation of the
operalion.
e\rtr dc
f,trllîi,Ï
tî it
4
lp

--- Page 5 ---
Article 14. - The quarterly declaration of imports of goods or services made by
extractive companies and paid from an account outside CEMAC, as well as the
associated domiciliation, are accompanied by contracts, invoices and order forms
relating to the imported goods and services.
contracts, invoices and purchase orders relating to imported goods and services shall be
sent to the Central Bank at the same time as their initial declaration within the framework
of the quarterly declaration referred to in Article l3 of this Instruction.
Article 15, - Once the documents set out in Article 9 ol this Instruction have been
transmitted by the importing extractive company, the Central Bank issues it with a
Declaration Certificate, specifying its references.
Section 4: Payment of imports of goods and services
Article 16, - The payment of imports of goods and services by companies in the
extiactive sector by credit institutions from an account in CEMAC is carried out without
delay upon receipt of the documents referred to in Article 9 of this Instruction and, in
the case olimports paid from a foreign currency account, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the loreign exchange rcgulations in force, in particular the decision to
authorise the opening of said account.
Article 17. - The payment of imports ofgoods and services from an account outside
CEMAC is carried out in accordance with the relevant provisions of the exchange
regulations in force, in particular the decision authorising the opening of the said
account.
Section 5: Clearance of imports of goods and services
Article 18. - Domiciliary Credit Institutions shall follow up on the discharge of
domiciliation files opened in their books in respect of imports ofgoods and services by
cornpanies in the extractive sector in accordance with the provisions of this Instruction.
Within the framework of the clearance of imports of goods and services by companies
in the extractive sector, the Domiciliary Credit Institutions shall collect the documents
provided for in Article 9 of this Instruction and ensure their completeness and
conformity with the imported goods and services.
Article 19. - The Central Bank follows up on the discharge of domiciliation files for
imports of goods and services whose payment is made from an account outside CEMAC
by an extractive company.
Æ\
w
ffiar*,,"E
t)
5

--- Page 6 ---
Article 20. - The period for discharging the import files ol goods and services of
companies in the extractive sector is set at three (3) months, starting from the date of
final payment of the import concemed, unless the contract relating to the import of the
goods or services in question provides for a longer import period; in which case, this
contractual period shall apply, subject to compliance r.vith the declaratory obligations
set out in Article l3 of this Instruction.
Article 21.- Goods or services u,hich have been effectively imported into GEMAC lor
more than the three (3) month period for discharge set out in Article 20 of this Instruction
are reported to:
the Domiciliary Credit Institution, if the payment of the goods is made by the
extractive sector company from an account in CEMAC.
the Central Bank if the payment for the goods is made by the extractive company
from an account domiciled outside CEMAC.
Article 22. - The documents to be produced to justifu the discharge of an import of
goods are:
- the accounting document issued by the Customs Administration or any document in
lieu thereol
- the receipt for payment of customs duties and taxes due, related to the import
concemed;
- the bill of lading, air waybill or consignment note in the case ofan import ofgoods;
- the final invoice, purchase order, expense account, debit note, or any other
supporting document.
Article 23. - When discharging the import of a service, the company in the extractive
sector shall, in addition to the final invoice, provide prool of the effectiveness of the
service, in particular by presenting a document from the supplier of the service dated
less than three months ago, attesting to the performance of the service as well as proof
of transfers to the account of the supplier of the service.
In the case of the clearance ol imports of services between affiliated companies defined
as companies belonging to the same group, the Central Bank may request any other
information which may attest to the performance of the service.
Article 24. - The Central Bank reserves the right to request any additional information
and/or evidence deemed necessary to ensure the effective discharge of the settled
service.
Article 25- In the event of non-discharge of an import of d services file within
the time limit set out in Article 20 of this Instruction, the r the Domiciliary
:,tri*îîï
6
/9
'!z

--- Page 7 ---
credit Institution shall send the extractive sector company concemed a formal notice
listing the missing proof of discharge.
The extractive company has a period offifteen (15) days, from the date ofreceipt of the
formal notice, to send the missing proof of clearance or a reasoned reply justiÿing the
absence of the required documents.
The Central Bank may not impose any sanctions on the extractive sector company
concemed while the clearance file is being processed. The Domiciliary Credit Institution
shall execute, over the reference period, any payment request from the extractive sector
company concerned.
Section 6: Miscellaneous and final provisions
Article 26. - The Central Bank rnay request from Credit Institutions and the Customs
Adrninistration, as necessary, any document and inlormation relating to imports of
goods and services by extractive companies.
Article 27. - The notion of arm's length is assessed in accordance with the legislation of
the country in which the impo(ing extractive company is established and, failing that,
with the principles of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development
(oECD).
Article 28. - Periodic controls are carried out by the Central Bank to ensure compliance
with the provisions of this Instruction.
Article 29. - Any failure to comply with this Instruction shall be recorded and sanctioned
in accordance with the provisions ofthe foreign exchange regulations in force.
Article 30. - This Instruction may be amended by the Central Bank. It may be specified
in a Circular Letter from the Govemor of the Central Bank.
Article 31. - This lnstruction cancels and replaces Instruction n"0071GPU2021 of 13
December 202 1, specifuing the conditions and modalities for the declaration,
domiciliation, settlement and clearance of imports of goods and services by extractive
companies. It enters into force on the date of signature.
etrl!
'É\
"r4
BAS MAHAMAT TOLLI
raoJ
7

--- Page 8 ---
I I
! I
I i 3fi
i t
I
:
t
!
I
ffi È
T
q
,!; ,
iiÈ ! I
I
! i", §
:
§
E*i
â
I
c
!Ë
!:
g
3t
:
! E
ffi I t
I
I
5
I
i
i
I
a
F
T
I I
I I
i
rt
I I
I
I I
I i
I I
3
I I
I
t
I
I
e
Éi!
a
a